10-k
1
a2207179z10-k.htm
10-k



bazadebezolkohpepadr="618498294"



use these links to rapidly review the document
table of contents 
index to consolidated financial statements







































 
table of contents 


 

united states
securities and exchange commission  washington, d.c. 20549  

form 10-k  
 













(mark one)
 
 


ý
 
annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 for the fiscal year ended december 31, 2011


or


o
 
transition report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934



 
 





  




 


















commission
file number 
 
exact name of registrant as specified in its charter,
principal office address and telephone number 
 
state of
incorporation/organization 
 
i.r.s. employer
identification no. 


001-32427
 
 
huntsman corporation
500 huntsman way
salt lake city, utah 84108
(801) 584-5700
 
delaware
 
42-1648585


333-85141
 
 
huntsman international llc
500 huntsman way
salt lake city, utah 84108
(801) 584-5700
 
delaware
 
87-0630358



 
 





  





securities registered pursuant to section 12(b) of the exchange act:  
 















registrant 
 
title of each class 
 
name of each exchange on which registered 


huntsman corporation
 
common stock, par value $0.01 per share
 
new york stock exchange


huntsman international llc
 
none
 
none



 
securities registered pursuant to section 12(g) of the exchange act:  
 













registrant 
 
title of each class 


huntsman corporation
 
none


huntsman international llc
 
none



 
 





  





indicate
by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in rule 405 of the securities act. 
 















huntsman corporation
 
yes ý
 
no o


huntsman international llc
 
yes o
 
no ý



 
indicate
by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to section 13 or section 15(d) of the exchange act. 
 















huntsman corporation
 
yes o
 
no ý


huntsman international llc
 
yes o
 
no ý



 
indicate
by check mark whether the registrant: (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by section 13 or 15(d) of the exchange act during the preceding
12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports) and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. 
 















huntsman corporation
 
yes ý
 
no o


huntsman international llc
 
yes ý
 
no o



 
indicate
by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate web site, if any, every interactive data file required to be submitted and posted
pursuant to rule 405 of regulation s-t during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and post such files). 
 















huntsman corporation
 
yes ý
 
no o


huntsman international llc
 
yes ý
 
no o



 
indicate
by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item 405 of regulation s-k is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the
best of the registrants' knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in part iii of this form 10-k or any amendment to this
form 10-k. o 

indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting
company. see the definitions of "large accelerated filer," "accelerated filer," and "smaller reporting company" in rule 12b-2 of the exchange act. 
 



















huntsman corporation
 
large accelerated filer ý
 
accelerated filer o
 
non-accelerated filer o
 
smaller reporting company o


huntsman international llc
 
large accelerated filer o
 
accelerated filer o
 
non-accelerated filer ý
 
smaller reporting company o



 
indicate
by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in rule 12b-2 of the exchange act). 
 















huntsman corporation
 
yes o
 
no ý


huntsman international llc
 
yes o
 
no ý



 
on
june 30, 2011, the last business day of the registrants' most recently completed second fiscal quarter, the aggregate market value of voting and non-voting common
equity held by non-affiliates was as follows: 
 















registrant 
 
common equity 
 
market value held by nonaffiliates 


huntsman corporation
 
common stock
 
$2,443,542,295(1)


huntsman international llc
 
units of membership interest
 
$0(2)







 

 
(1)based
on the closing price of $18.85 per share of common stock as quoted on the new york stock exchange.
(2)all
units of membership interest are held by huntsman corporation, an affiliate. 
 
on
february 3, 2012, the number of shares outstanding of each of the registrant's classes of common equity were as follows: 
 















registrant 
 
common equity 
 
outstanding 


huntsman corporation
 
common stock
 
237,872,407


huntsman international llc
 
units of membership interest
 
2,728



 
this
annual report on form 10-k presents information for two registrants: huntsman corporation and huntsman international llc. huntsman
international llc is a wholly owned subsidiary of huntsman corporation and is the principal operating company of huntsman corporation. the information reflected in this annual report on
form 10-k is equally applicable to both huntsman corporation and huntsman international llc, except where otherwise indicated. 


huntsman
international llc meets the conditions set forth in general instructions (i)(1)(a) and (b) of form 10-k and, to the extent applicable,
is therefore filing this form with a reduced disclosure format. 

documents incorporated by reference  

part iii: proxy statement for the 2012 annual meeting of stockholders to be filed within 120 days of
huntsman corporation's fiscal year ended december 31, 2011. 
   

   

 
 






 









































table of contents 

 

huntsman corporation and subsidiaries
huntsman international llc and subsidiaries
2011 annual report on form 10-k  

table of contents        


 
 


















 
 
 
 
page 
 


part i
 
 
 
 
 
 


item 1.
 
business
 
 
1
 


item 1a.
 
risk factors
 
 
33
 


item 1b.
 
unresolved staff comments
 
 
44
 


item 2.
 
properties
 
 
44
 


item 3.
 
legal proceedings
 
 
46
 


item 4.
 
mine safety disclosures
 
 
49
 


 
 
executive officers of the registrant
 
 
49
 


part ii
 
 
 
 
 
 


item 5.
 
market for registrant's common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities
 
 
52
 


item 6.
 
selected financial data
 
 
54
 


item 7.
 
management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
 
 
56
 


item 7a.
 
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
 
 
92
 


item 8.
 
financial statements and supplementary data
 
 
95
 


item 9.
 
changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
 
 
95
 


item 9a.
 
controls and procedures
 
 
95
 


item 9b.
 
other information
 
 
102
 


part iii
 
 
 
 
 
 


item 10.
 
directors, executive officers and corporate governance
 
 
102
 


item 11.
 
executive compensation
 
 
102
 


item 12.
 
security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters
 
 
102
 


item 13.
 
certain relationships and related transactions, and director independence
 
 
102
 


item 14.
 
principal accountant fees and services
 
 
102
 


part iv
 
 
 
 
 
 


item 15.
 
exhibits and financial statement schedules
 
 
103
 




 
i






 



































 




table of contents 

 
 
huntsman corporation and subsidiaries  huntsman international llc and subsidiaries  2011 annual report on form 10-k        

with respect to huntsman corporation, certain information set forth in this report contains "forward-looking statements" within the
meaning of the federal securities laws. huntsman international is a limited liability company and, pursuant to section 21e(b)2(e) of the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended ("exchange
act"), the safe-harbor for certain forward-looking statements is not applicable to it. 

forward-looking
statements include statements concerning our plans, objectives, goals, strategies, future events, future revenues or performance, capital expenditures, financing needs,
plans or intentions relating to acquisitions or dispositions and other information that is not historical information. in some cases, forward-looking statements can be identified by terminology such
as "believes," "expects," "may," "will," "should," "anticipates" or "intends" or the negative of such terms or other comparable terminology, or by discussions of strategy. we may also make additional
forward- looking statements from time to time. all such subsequent forward-looking statements, whether written or oral, by us or on our behalf, are also expressly qualified by these cautionary
statements. 

all
forward-looking statements, including without limitation management's examination of historical operating trends, are based upon our current expectations and various assumptions. our
expectations, beliefs and projections are expressed in good faith and we believe there is a reasonable basis for them, but there can be no assurance that management's expectations, beliefs and
projections will result or be achieved. all forward-looking statements apply only as of the date made. we undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise forward-looking statements which may be
made to reflect events or circumstances after the date made or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events. 

there
are a number of risks and uncertainties that could cause our actual results to differ materially from the forward-looking statements contained in or contemplated by this report.
any forward-looking statements should be considered in light of the risks set forth in "part i. item 1a. risk factors" and elsewhere in this report. 

this
report includes information with respect to market share, industry conditions and forecasts that we obtained from internal industry research, publicly available information
(including industry publications and surveys), and surveys and market research provided by consultants. the publicly available information and the reports, forecasts and other research provided by
consultants generally state that the information contained therein has been obtained from sources believed to be reliable. we have not independently verified any of the data from third-party sources,
nor have we ascertained the underlying economic assumptions relied upon therein. similarly, our internal research and forecasts are based upon our management's understanding of industry conditions,
and such information has not been verified by any independent sources. 

for
convenience in this report, the terms "company," "our," "us," or "we" may be used to refer to huntsman corporation and, unless the context otherwise requires, its subsidiaries and
predecessors. any references to our "company," "we," "us" or "our" as of a date prior to october 19, 2004 (the date of our formation) are to huntsman holdings, llc and its subsidiaries
(including their respective predecessors). in this report, "huntsman international" refers to huntsman international llc (our 100% owned subsidiary) and, unless the context otherwise requires,
its subsidiaries; "hps" refers to huntsman polyurethanes shanghai ltd. (a consolidated splitting joint venture with shanghai chlor-alkali chemical company, ltd); and "slic" refers to
shanghai liengheng isocyanate investment bv (an unconsolidated manufacturing joint venture with basf ag and three chinese chemical companies). 

in
this report, we may use, without definition, the common names of competitors or other industry participants. we may also use the common names or abbreviations for certain chemicals or
products. many of these terms are defined in the glossary of chemical terms found at the conclusion of "part i. item 1. business" below. 

ii






 









































table of contents 

 
 
part i        

 
item 1.    business        

general  

we are a global manufacturer of differentiated organic chemical products and of inorganic chemical products. our company, a delaware
corporation, was formed in 2004 to hold the businesses of huntsman holdings, llc, a company founded by jon m. huntsman. mr. huntsman founded the predecessor to our company in 1970 as a
small polystyrene plastics packaging company. since then, we have grown through a series of significant acquisitions and now own a global portfolio of businesses. 


we
operate all of our businesses through huntsman international, our 100% owned subsidiary. huntsman international is a delaware limited liability company and was formed in 1999. 

our
principal executive offices are located at 500 huntsman way, salt lake city, utah 84108, and our telephone number at that location is (801) 584-5700. 

overview  

our products comprise a broad range of chemicals and formulations which we market globally to a diversified group of consumer and
industrial customers. our products are used in a wide range of applications, including those in the adhesives, aerospace, automotive, construction products, durable and non-durable
consumer products, electronics, medical, packaging, paints and coatings, power generation, refining, synthetic fiber, textile chemicals and dye industries. we are a leading global producer in many of
our key product lines, including mdi, amines, surfactants, epoxy-based polymer formulations, textile chemicals, dyes, maleic anhydride and titanium dioxide. our administrative, research and
development and manufacturing operations are primarily conducted at the facilities listed in "—item 2. properties" below, which are located in 30 countries. as of
december 31, 2011, we employed approximately 12,000 associates worldwide. our revenues for the years ended december 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 were $11,221 million,
$9,250 million and $7,665 million, respectively. 

we
operate in five segments: polyurethanes, performance products, advanced materials, textile effects and pigments. in a series of transactions beginning in 2006, we sold our north
american polymers and base chemicals operations and substantially shutdown all of our australian styrenics operations. we report the results of these businesses as discontinued operations in our
statements of operations. see "note 25. discontinued operations" to our consolidated financial statements. 


our products  

we produce differentiated organic and inorganic chemical products. our polyurethanes, performance products, advanced materials and
textile effects segments produce differentiated organic chemical products and our pigments segment produces inorganic chemical products. 

growth
in our differentiated products has been driven by the substitution of our products for other materials and by the level of global economic activity. accordingly, the profitability
of our differentiated products has been somewhat less influenced by the cyclicality that typically impacts the petrochemical 

1




 

table of contents

industry.
our pigments business, while cyclical, is influenced by seasonal demand patterns in the coatings industry. 
 













2011 segment revenues(1)
 
2011 segment ebitda from continuing operations(1)



 

 







 

 
(1)percentage
allocations in this chart do not give effect to corporate and other unallocated items, eliminations and ebitda from discontinued operations. for
a detailed disclosure of our revenues, total assets and ebitda by segment, see "note 27. operating segment information" to our consolidated financial statements. for a discussion of ebitda by
segment and a reconciliation of ebitda to net income attributable to huntsman corporation and cash provided by operating activities, see "part ii. item 7. management's discussion and
analysis of financial condition and results of operations—results of operations." 
 
2




 

table of contents

the
following table identifies the key products, their principal end markets and applications and representative customers of each of our segments: 
 

















segment



 
 
products 
 
end markets and applications 
 
representative customers 


polyurethanes
 
mdi, po, polyols, pg, tpu, aniline and mtbe
 
refrigeration and appliance insulation, construction products, adhesives, automotive, footwear, furniture, cushioning, specialized engineering applications and fuel additives
 
bmw, certainteed, electrolux, firestone, ge, haier, louisiana pacific, recticel, weyerhaeuser


performance products
 
amines, surfactants, lab, maleic anhydride, other performance chemicals, eg, olefins and technology licenses
 
detergents, personal care products, agrochemicals, lubricant and fuel additives, adhesives, paints and coatings, construction, marine and automotive products, composites, and pet fibers and resins
 
afton, chevron, dow, henkel, l'oreal, lubrizol, monsanto, procter & gamble, reichhold, the sun products corporation, unilever


advanced materials
 
basic liquid and solid epoxy resins; specialty resin compounds; cross-linking, matting and curing agents; epoxy, acrylic and polyurethane-based formulations
 
adhesives, composites for aerospace, automotive, and wind power generation; construction and civil engineering; industrial coatings; electrical power transmission; consumer electronics
 
abb, akzo, bodo moller, cytec, freeman, hexcel, isola, lianyungang, omya, ppg, ribelin, rpm, sanarrow, schneider, sherwin williams, siemens, sinomatech, speed fair, syngenta, viasystems


textile effects
 
textile chemicals and dyes
 
apparel, home and technical textiles
 
alok industries, aunde, nice dyeing, esquel group, fruit of the loom, hanesbrands, y.r.c., guilford mills, polartec, tencate, zaber & zubair


pigments
 
titanium dioxide
 
paints and coatings, plastics, paper, printing inks, fibers and ceramics
 
akzo, clariant, jotun, polyone, ppg



 
3




 

table of contents


polyurethanes  

general  

we are a leading global manufacturer and marketer of a broad range of polyurethane chemicals, including mdi products, po, polyols, pg
and tpu. polyurethane chemicals are used to produce rigid and flexible foams, as well as coatings, adhesives, sealants and elastomers. we focus on the higher-margin, higher-growth markets for mdi and
mdi-based polyurethane systems. growth in our polyurethanes segment has been driven primarily by the continued substitution of mdi-based products for other materials across a
broad range of applications. we operate 5 primary polyurethanes manufacturing facilities in the u.s., europe and china. we also operate 15 polyurethanes formulation facilities, which are located in
close proximity to our customers worldwide. 

our
customers produce polyurethane products through the combination of an isocyanate, such as mdi or tdi, with polyols, which are derived largely from po and eo. while the range of
tdi-based products is relatively limited, we are able to produce over 2,000 distinct mdi-based polyurethane products by modifying the mdi molecule through varying the
proportion and type of polyol used and by introducing other chemical additives to our mdi formulations. as a result, polyurethane products, especially those derived from mdi, are continuing to replace
traditional products in a wide range of end use markets, including insulation in construction and appliances, cushioning for automotive and furniture, adhesives, wood binders, footwear and other
specialized engineering applications. 

we
are one of three north american producers of po. we and some of our customers process po into derivative products, such as polyols for polyurethane products, pg and various other
chemical products. end uses for these derivative products include applications in the home furnishings, construction, appliances, packaging, automotive and transportation, food, paints and coatings
and cleaning products industries. we also produce mtbe as a co-product of our po manufacturing process. mtbe is an oxygenate that is blended with gasoline to reduce harmful vehicle
emissions and to
enhance the octane rating of gasoline. see "—environmental, health and safety matters—mtbe developments" below. 


in
1992, we were the first global supplier of polyurethane chemicals to open a technical service center in china. we have since expanded this facility to include an integrated
polyurethanes formulation facility. in january 2003, we entered into two related joint ventures to build mdi production and finishing facilities near shanghai, china. production at our mdi finishing
plant near shanghai, china operated by hps, a consolidated joint venture, was commissioned on june 30, 2006. production at the mnb, aniline and crude mdi plants operated by slic, an
unconsolidated joint venture, commenced on september 30, 2006. these world-scale facilities strengthen our ability to service our customers in the critical chinese market and will support the
significant demand growth that we believe this region will continue to experience. 

4






 




































 
table of contents 

products and markets  

mdi is used primarily in rigid foam applications and in a wide variety of customized, higher-value flexible foam and coatings,
adhesives, sealants and elastomers. polyols, including polyether and polyester polyols, are used in conjunction with mdi and tdi in rigid foam, flexible foam and other non-foam
applications. po is one of the principal raw materials for producing polyether polyols. the following chart illustrates the range of product types and end uses for polyurethane chemicals. 



  

polyurethane
chemicals are sold to customers who combine the chemicals to produce polyurethane products. depending on their needs, customers will use either commodity polyurethane
chemicals produced for mass sales or polyurethane systems tailored for their specific requirements. by varying the blend, additives and specifications of the polyurethane chemicals, manufacturers are
able to develop and produce a breadth and variety of polyurethane products. 


mdi.    mdi has a substantially larger market size and a higher growth rate than tdi. this is primarily because mdi can be used to
make polyurethanes
with a broader range of properties and can therefore be used in a wider range of applications than tdi. we believe that future growth of mdi is expected to be driven by the continued substitution of
mdi-based polyurethane for fiberglass and other materials currently used in rigid insulation foam for construction. we expect that other markets, such as binders for reconstituted wood
board products, specialty cushioning applications and coatings will further contribute to the continued growth of mdi. 


with
the recent rapid growth of the developing asian economies, the asian markets have now become the largest market for mdi. 

tpu.    tpu is a high-quality, fully formulated thermal plastic derived from the reaction of mdi or an aliphatic isocyanate with
polyols to
produce unique qualities such as durability, flexibility, strength, abrasion-resistance, shock absorbency and chemical resistance. we can tailor the performance characteristics of tpu to meet the
specific requirements of our customers. tpu is used in injection molding and small components for the automotive and footwear industries. it is also extruded into films, wires and cables for use in a
wide variety of applications in the coatings, adhesives, sealants and elastomers markets. 

5




 

table of contents

polyols.    polyols are combined with mdi, tdi and other isocyanates to create a broad spectrum of polyurethane products. demand
for specialty polyols
has been growing at approximately the same rate at which mdi consumption has grown. 

aniline.    aniline is an intermediate chemical used primarily to manufacture mdi. generally, aniline is either consumed internally
by the producers of
the aniline or is sold to third parties under long-term supply contracts. we believe that the lack of a significant spot market for aniline means that in order to remain competitive, mdi
manufacturers must either be integrated with an aniline manufacturing facility or have a long-term, cost-competitive aniline supply contract. 


po.    po is an intermediate chemical used mainly to produce a wide range of polyols and pg. demand for po depends largely on
overall economic demand,
especially that of consumer durables. the following chart illustrates the primary end markets and applications for po. 



  

mtbe.    mtbe is an oxygenate that is blended with gasoline to reduce harmful vehicle emissions and to enhance the octane rating of
gasoline. while mtbe
has been effectively eliminated in the united states, demand continues to grow in other regions of the world. in 2011 we announced the signing of a license agreement with chinese chemicals
manufacturer yantai wanhua polyurethanes co., ltd, for the production of po and mtbe. see "—environmental, health and safety matters—mtbe developments" below and
"part i. item 1a. risk factors." we continue to sell mtbe for use as a gasoline additive, substantially all of which is sold for use outside the u.s. see "—manufacturing and
operations" below and "part ii. item 7. management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations." 


sales and marketing  

our global sales group markets our polyurethane chemicals to over 3,500 customers in more than 90 countries. our sales and technical
resources are organized to support major regional markets, as well as key end use markets which require a more global approach. these key end use markets include the appliance, automotive, footwear,
furniture and coatings, construction products, adhesives, sealants and elastomers industries. 

6




 


table of contents

we
provide a wide variety of polyurethane solutions as components (i.e., the isocyanate or the polyol) or in the form of "systems" in which we provide the total isocyanate and
polyol formulation to our customers in ready-to-use form. our ability to deliver a range of polyurethane solutions and technical support tailored to meet our customer's needs
is critical to our long term success. we have strategically located our polyurethane formulation facilities, commonly referred to in the chemicals industry as "systems houses," close to our customers,
enabling us to focus on customer support and technical service. we believe this customer support and technical service system contributes to customer retention and also provides opportunities for
identifying further product and service needs of customers. we manufacture polyols primarily to support our mdi customers' requirements. 

we
believe that the extensive market knowledge and industry experience of our sales teams and technical experts, in combination with our strong emphasis on customer relationships, have
facilitated our ability to establish and maintain long-term customer supply positions. our strategy is to continue to increase sales to existing customers and to attract new customers by
providing innovative solutions, quality products, reliable supply, competitive prices and superior customer service. 


manufacturing and operations  

our mdi production facilities are located in geismar, louisiana; rozenburg, the netherlands; and through our joint ventures in caojing,
china. these facilities receive aniline, which is a primary material used in the production of mdi, from our facilities located in geismar, louisiana; wilton, u.k.; and caojing, china. we believe that
this relative scale and product integration of our large facilities provide a significant competitive advantage over other producers. in addition to reducing transportation costs for our raw
materials, integration helps reduce our exposure to cyclical prices. 

the
following table sets forth the annual production capacity of polyurethane chemicals at each of our polyurethanes facilities: 
 




































 
 
mdi 
 
polyols 
 
tpu 
 
aniline 
 
nitrobenzene 
 
po 
 
pg 
 
mtbe 
 


 
 
(millions of pounds)
 
(millions
of gallons)
 


geismar, louisiana
 
 
990
 
 
160
 
 
 
 
 
715
(2)
 
953
(2)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


osnabrück, germany
 
 
 
 
 
26
 
 
59
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


port neches, texas
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
525
 
 
145
 
 
260
 


ringwood, illinois
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


caojing, china
 
 
265
(1)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


rozenburg, the netherlands
 
 
880
 
 
130
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


wilton, u.k. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
715
 
 
953
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
 
2,135
 
 
316
 
 
79
 
 
1,430
 
 
1,906
 
 
525
 
 
145
 
 
260
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 







 

 
(1)represents
our 50% share of capacity from slic, an unconsolidated chinese joint venture.
(2)represents
our approximately 78% share of capacity under our consolidated rubicon llc manufacturing joint venture with chemtura corporation. 
 
at
both our geismar and rozenburg facilities we utilize sophisticated proprietary technology to produce our mdi. this technology, which is also used in our chinese joint venture,
contributes to our position as a low cost mdi producer. in addition to mdi, we use a proprietary manufacturing process to manufacture po. we own or license all technology and know-how
developed and utilized at our po facility. our process combines isobutane and oxygen in proprietary oxidation (peroxidation) reactors, thereby forming tbhp and tba, which are further processed into po
and mtbe, respectively. because our po production process is less expensive relative to other technologies and allows all of our 

7




 

table of contents

po
co-products to be processed into saleable or useable materials, we believe that our po production technology possesses several distinct advantages over its alternatives. 

we
operate polyurethane systems houses in buenos aires, argentina; deer park, australia; shanghai, china; cartagena, colombia; deggendorf, germany; thane (maharashtra), india; ternate,
italy; tlalnepantla, mexico; mississauga, ontario; kuan yin, taiwan; samutprakarn, thailand; osnabrück, germany; dammam, saudi arabia; taboã da serra, brazil and
istanbul, turkey. 

joint ventures  

rubicon joint venture.    chemtura corporation is our joint venture partner in rubicon llc, which owns aniline, nitrobenzene
and dpa
manufacturing facilities in geismar, louisiana. we are entitled to approximately 78% of the nitrobenzene and aniline production capacity of rubicon llc, and chemtura corporation is entitled to
100% of the dpa production. in addition to operating the joint venture's aniline, nitrobenzene and dpa facilities, rubicon llc also operates our wholly owned mdi, polyol and maleic anhydride
facilities at geismar and is responsible for providing other auxiliary services to the entire geismar complex. as a result of this joint venture, we are able to achieve greater scale and lower costs
for our products than we would otherwise have been able to obtain. rubicon llc is consolidated in our financial statements. 

chinese mdi joint ventures.    we are involved in two related joint ventures which operate mdi production facilities near shanghai,
china. slic, our
manufacturing joint venture with basf ag and three chinese chemical companies, produces mnb, aniline and crude mdi. we effectively own 35% of slic and account for our investment under the equity
method. hps, our splitting joint venture with shanghai chlor-alkali chemical company, ltd, manufactures pure mdi, polymeric mdi and mdi variants. we own 70% of hps and it is a consolidated
affiliate. these projects have been funded by a combination of equity invested by the joint venture partners and borrowed funds. the total production capacity of the slic facilities is
530 million pounds per year of mdi and the splitting capacity of the hps facility is 339 million pounds per year of mdi. 

russian mdi, coatings and systems joint venture    in 2006, we purchased a 45% interest in international polyurethane
investments b.v. this
company's wholly-owned subsidiary, nmg is a leading polyurethanes producer headquartered in obninsk, russia. we account for this investment under the equity method. this joint venture, now huntsman
nmg zao, manufactures and markets a range of polyurethane systems in adhesives, coatings, elastomers and insulation using our mdi products. 

raw materials  

the primary raw materials for mdi-based polyurethane chemicals are benzene and po. benzene is a widely available commodity
that is the primary feedstock for the production of mdi and aniline. historically, benzene has been the largest component of our raw material costs. we purchase benzene from third parties to
manufacture nitrobenzene and aniline, almost all of which we then use to produce mdi. 


a
major cost in the production of polyols is attributable to the costs of po. the integration of our po business with our polyurethane chemicals business gives us access to a
competitively priced, strategic source of po and the opportunity to develop polyols that enhance our range of mdi products. the primary raw materials used in our po production process are
butane/isobutane, propylene, methanol and oxygen, which accounted for 55%, 33%, 11% and 1%, respectively, of segment raw material costs in 2011. we purchase a large portion of our raw materials under
long-term contracts. 

8






 




































 
table of contents 

competition  

our major competitors in the polyurethane chemicals market include basf, bayer, dow, yantai wanhua and lyondellbasell. while these
competitors and others produce various types and quantities of polyurethane chemicals, we focus on mdi and mdi-based polyurethane systems. our polyurethane chemicals business competes in
two basic ways: (1) where price is the dominant element of competition, our polyurethane chemicals business differentiates itself by its high level of customer support, including cooperation on
technical and safety matters; and (2) elsewhere, we compete on the basis of product performance and our ability to react quickly to changing customer needs and by providing customers with
innovative solutions to their needs. 

some
of our competitors in the polyurethanes segment are among the world's largest chemical companies and major integrated petroleum companies. these competitors may have their own raw
material resources. some of these companies may be able to produce products more economically than we can. in addition, some of our competitors in this market have greater financial resources, which
may enable them to invest significant capital into their businesses, including expenditures for research and development. if any of our current or future competitors in this market develop proprietary
technology
that enables them to produce products at a significantly lower cost, our technology could be rendered uneconomical or obsolete. 

performance products  

general  

our performance products segment is organized around three market areas: performance specialties, performance intermediates and maleic
anhydride and licensing, and serves a wide variety of consumer and industrial end markets. in performance specialties, we are a leading global producer of amines, carbonates and certain specialty
surfactants. growth in demand in our performance specialties market tends to be driven by the end-performance characteristics that our products deliver to our customers. these products are
manufactured for use in a growing number of niche industrial end uses and have been characterized by growing demand, technology substitution and stable profitability. for example, we are one of two
significant global producers of polyetheramines, for which our sales volumes have grown at a compound annual rate of over 8% in the last 10 years due to strong demand in a number of industrial
applications, such as epoxy curing agents, oil drilling, agrochemicals, fuel additives and civil construction materials. in performance intermediates, we consume internally produced and
third-party-sourced base petrochemicals in the manufacture of our surfactants, lab and ethanolamines products, which are primarily used in detergency, consumer products and industrial applications. we
also produce eg, which is primarily used in the production of polyester fibers and pet packaging. we believe we are north america's largest and lowest-cost producer of maleic anhydride.
maleic anhydride is the building block for uprs, which are mainly used in the production of fiberglass reinforced resins for marine, automotive and construction products. we are the leading global
licensor of maleic anhydride manufacturing technology and are also the largest supplier of butane fixed bed catalyst used in the manufacture of maleic anhydride. our licensing group also licenses
technology on behalf of our other businesses. we operate 19 performance products manufacturing facilities in north america, europe, middle east, india, asia and australia. 


we
have the annual capacity to produce approximately 1.4 billion pounds of more than 200 amines and other performance chemicals. we believe we are the largest global producer of
polyetheramines, propylene carbonates, ethylene carbonates, and dga® agent, the second largest producer of ethyleneamines and morpholine and the third-largest north american producer of
ethanolamines. we also produce substituted propylamines. we use internally produced ethylene, eo, eg and po in the manufacture of many of our amines and carbonates. our products are manufactured at
our port neches, conroe and freeport, texas facilities and at our facilities in llanelli, u.k.; petfurdo, hungary; 

9




 

table of contents

ankleshwar,
india; jurong island, singapore; and jubail saudi arabia. our amines are used in a wide variety of consumer and industrial applications, including personal care products, polyurethane
foam, fuel and lubricant additives, paints and coatings, composites, solvents and catalysts. our key amines customers include akzo, chevron, dow, hercules, afton, unilever, monsanto and ppg. 


we
have the capacity to produce approximately 2.4 billion pounds of surfactant products annually at our nine facilities located in north america, europe, india and australia. we
are a leading global manufacturer of nonionic, anionic, cationic and amphoteric surfactants products and are characterized by our breadth of product offering and market coverage. our surfactant
products are primarily used in consumer detergent and industrial cleaning applications. we are a leading european producer of components for powder and liquid laundry detergents and other cleaners. in
addition, we manufacture and market a diversified range of mild surfactants and specialty formulations for use in personal care applications. we continue to strengthen and diversify our surfactant
product offering into formulated specialty surfactant products for use in various industrial applications such as leather and textile treatment, foundry and construction, agrochemicals, fuels and
lubricants, polymers and coatings. we are growing our global agrochemical surfactant technology and product offerings. our key surfactants customers include sun products, l'oreal,
monsanto, nufarm, clorox, henkel, colgate, procter & gamble and unilever. 

we
are north america's largest producer of lab, with alkylation capacity of 400 million pounds per year at our plant in chocolate bayou, texas. lab is a surfactant intermediate
which is converted into las, a major anionic surfactant used worldwide for the production of consumer, industrial and institutional laundry detergents. we also manufacture a higher-molecular-weight
alkylate which is used as an additive to lubricants. our key customers for lab and specialty alkylates include colgate, lubrizol, henkel, procter & gamble, unilever and sun products. 

we
believe we are the largest global producer of maleic anhydride, a highly versatile chemical intermediate that is used to produce uprs, which are mainly used in the production of
fiberglass reinforced resins for marine, automotive and construction products. maleic anhydride is also used in the production of lubricants, food additives and artificial sweeteners. we have the
capacity to produce approximately 583 million pounds annually at our facilities located in pensacola, florida; geismar, louisiana; and moers, germany. we also license our maleic anhydride
technology and supply our catalysts to licensees and to worldwide merchant customers. as a result of our long-standing research and development efforts aided by our pilot and catalyst
preparation plants, we have successfully introduced six generations of our maleic anhydride catalysts and now have a seventh generation catalyst commercially available. revenue from licensing and
catalyst comes from new plant commissioning, as well as current plant retrofits and catalyst change schedules. our key maleic anhydride customers include aoc, chevron oronite, ccp composites, dixie,
lubrizol, infineum, reichhold, tate & lyle, cranston print, gulf bayport, and bartek. 


we
also have the capacity to produce approximately 945 million pounds of eg annually at our facilities in port neches, texas and botany, australia. 

10




 

table of contents


products and markets  

performance specialties.    the following table shows the end-market applications for our performance specialties products:

 













product group



 
 
applications 


specialty amines
 
liquid soaps, personal care, lubricant and fuel additives, polyurethane foams, fabric softeners, paints and coatings, refinery processing, water treating


polyetheramines
 
polyurethane foams and insulation, construction and flooring, paints and coatings, lubricant and fuel additives,
adhesives, epoxy composites, agrochemicals, oilfield chemicals, printing inks, pigment dispersion


ethyleneamines
 
lubricant and fuel additives, epoxy hardeners, wet strength resins, chelating agents, fungicides


morpholine/dga® agent and gas treating
 
hydrocarbon processing, construction chemicals, synthetic rubber, water treating, electronics applications, gas
treatment and agriculture


carbonates
 
lubricant and fuel additives, agriculture, electronics applications, textile treatment, solar panels


specialty surfactants
 
agricultural herbicides, construction, paper de-inking, lubricants


specialty alkylates
 
lubricant additive



 
our
performance specialties products are organized around the following end markets: coatings, polymers and resins; process additives; resources, fuels and lubricants; and agrochemicals.
as part of a business reorganization effective january 1, 2012, our performance specialties products will be organized around the following end markets: energy, materials, additives, processing
chemicals and agrochemicals. 

amines.    amines broadly refers to the family of intermediate chemicals that are produced by reacting ammonia with various ethylene
and propylene
derivatives. generally, amines are valued for their
properties as a reactive, agent, emulsifier, dispersant, detergent, solvent or corrosion inhibiting agent. growth in demand for amines is highly correlated with gdp growth due to its strong links to
general industrial and consumer products markets. however, certain segments of the amines market, such as polyetheramines, have grown at rates well in excess of gdp growth due to new product
development, technical innovation, and substitution and replacement of competing products. for example, polyetheramines are used by customers who demand increasingly sophisticated performance
characteristics as an additive in the manufacture of highly customized epoxy formulations, enabling customers to penetrate new markets and substitute for traditional curing materials. as amines are
generally sold based upon the performance characteristics that they provide to customer-specific end use application, pricing does not generally fluctuate directly with movements in underlying raw
materials. 

morpholine/dga® agent.    morpholine and dga® agent are produced as co-products by reacting ammonia with deg.
morpholine is used in a number of niche industrial applications including rubber curing (as an accelerator) and flocculants for water treatment. dga® agent is primarily used in gas
treating, electronics, herbicides and metalworking end use applications. 

carbonates.    ethylene and propylene carbonates are manufactured by reacting eo and po with carbon dioxide. carbonates are used as
solvents and as
reactive diluents in polymer and coating 

11




 

table of contents

applications.
they are also increasingly being used as a photo-resist solvent in the manufacture of printed circuit boards, solar panels, lcd screens and the production of lithium batteries. 

performance intermediates.    the following table sets forth the end markets for our performance intermediates products:

 













product group



 
 
end markets 


surfactants
 
 


alkoxylates
 
household detergents, industrial cleaners, anti-fog chemicals for glass, asphalt emulsions, shampoos,
polymerization additives, de-emulsifiers for petroleum production


sulfonates/sulfates
 
powdered detergents, liquid detergents, shampoos, body washes, dishwashing liquids, industrial cleaners, emulsion
polymerization, concrete superplasticizers, gypsum wallboard


esters and derivatives
 
shampoo, body wash, textile and leather treatment


nitrogen derivatives
 
bleach thickeners, baby shampoo, fabric conditioners, other personal care products


formulated blends
 
household detergents, textile and leather treatment, personal care products, pharmaceutical
intermediates


eo/po block co-polymers
 
automatic dishwasher detergents


ethanolamines
 
wood preservatives, herbicides, construction products, gas treatment, metalworking


lab
 
consumer detergents, industrial and institutional detergents


eg
 
polyester fibers and pet bottle resins, antifreeze



 
surfactants.    surfactants or "surface active agents" are substances that combine a water soluble component with a water insoluble
component in the
same molecule. while surfactants are most commonly used for their detergency in cleaning applications, they are also valued for their emulsification, foaming, dispersing, penetrating and wetting
properties in a variety of industries. 

demand
growth for surfactants is relatively stable and exhibits little cyclicality. the main consumer product applications for surfactants can demand new formulations with improved
performance characteristics, which affords considerable opportunity for innovative surfactants manufacturers like us to provide surfactants and blends with differentiated specifications and
properties. for basic surfactants, pricing tends to have a strong relationship to underlying raw material prices and usually lags raw material price movements. 

ethanolamines.    ethanolamines are a range of chemicals produced by the reaction of eo with ammonia. they are used as
intermediates in the production
of a variety of industrial, agricultural and consumer products. there are a limited number of competitors due to the technical and cost barriers to entry. growth in this sector has typically been
higher than gdp but saw a decline in late 2009 followed by a recovery in demand in 2011. 

lab.    lab is a surfactant intermediate which is produced through the reaction of benzene with either normal paraffins or linear
alpha olefins. nearly
all the lab produced globally is converted into las, a major anionic surfactant used worldwide for the production of consumer, industrial and institutional laundry detergents. 

12




 

table of contents

three
major manufacturers lead the traditional detergency market for lab in north america: procter & gamble, henkel and the sun products corp. we believe that
two-thirds of the lab global capacity lies in the hands of ten producers, with three or four major producers in each of the three regional markets. although the north american market for
lab is mature, we expect latin american and other developing countries to grow as detergent demand grows at a faster rate than gdp. growth in demand for specialty alkylates for use in lubricants is
expected to be higher than gdp. we have developed a unique manufacturing capability for a high molecular weight alkylate for this market. with a significant technical barrier to entry, our specialty
alkylate capability has allowed us greater diversity in our portfolio and strengthened our competitive position versus lab-only producers. 

eg.    we consume our internally produced eo to produce three types of eg: meg, deg and teg. meg is consumed primarily in the
polyester (fiber and
bottle resin) and antifreeze end markets and is also used in a wide variety of industrial applications including synthetic lubricants, plasticizers, solvents and emulsifiers. deg is consumed
internally for the production of morpholine/dga® agent and polyols. teg is used internally for the production of polyols and is sold into the market for dehydration of natural gas. we
continue to optimize our eo and eg operations depending on the fundamental market demand for eg. 

maleic anhydride and licensing.    the following table sets forth the end markets for our maleic anhydride products: 
 













product group



 
 
end markets 


maleic anhydride
 
boat hulls, automotive, construction, lubricant and fuel additives, countertops, agrochemicals, paper, and food additives


maleic anhydride catalyst and technology licensing
 
maleic anhydride, bdo and its derivatives, and pbt manufacturers



 
maleic
anhydride is a chemical intermediate that is produced by oxidizing either benzene or normal butane through the use of a catalyst. the largest use of maleic anhydride in the u.s.
is in the production of uprs, which we believe account for approximately 48% of north american maleic anhydride demand. upr is the main ingredient in fiberglass reinforced resins, which are used for
marine and automotive applications and commercial and residential construction products. 

our
maleic anhydride technology is a proprietary fixed bed process with solvent recovery and is characterized by low butane consumption and an energy- efficient,
high-percentage-recovery solvent recovery system. this process competes against two other processes, the fluid bed process and the fixed bed process with water recovery. we believe that
our process is superior in the areas of feedstock and energy efficiency and solvent recovery. the maleic anhydride-based route to bdo manufacture is currently the preferred process technology and is
favored over the other routes, which include po, butadiene and acetylene as feedstocks. as a result, the growth in demand for bdo has resulted in increased demand for our maleic anhydride technology
and catalyst. 

total
north american demand for maleic anhydride in 2011 was approximately 608 million pounds. over time, demand for maleic anhydride has generally grown at rates that slightly
exceed gdp growth. however, given its dependence on the upr market, which is heavily influenced by construction end markets, demand for this application can be cyclical. generally, changes in price
have resulted from changes in industry capacity utilization as opposed to changes in underlying raw material costs. 

sales and marketing  


we sell over 2,000 products to over 4,000 customers globally through our performance products marketing groups, which have extensive
market knowledge, considerable chemical industry experience and well established customer relationships. 

13




 

table of contents

our
performance specialties markets are organized around end use market applications, such as coatings, polymers and resins and agrochemical. in these end uses, our marketing efforts are
focused on how our product offerings perform in certain customer applications. we believe that this approach enhances the value of our product offerings and creates opportunities for ongoing
differentiation in our development activities with our customers. our performance intermediates and maleic anhydride groups organize their marketing efforts around their products and geographic
regions served. we also provide extensive pre- and post-sales technical service support to our customers where our technical service professionals work closely with our
research and development functions to tailor our product offerings to meet our customers unique and changing requirements. finally, these technical service professionals interact closely with our
market managers and business leadership teams to help guide future offerings and market approach strategies. 


in
addition to our focused direct sales efforts, we maintain an extensive global network of distributors and agents that also sell our products. these distributors and agents typically
promote our products to smaller end use customers who cannot be served cost effectively by our direct sales forces. 

manufacturing and operations  

our performance products segment has the capacity to produce more than seven billion pounds annually of a wide variety of specialty,
intermediate and commodity products and formulations at 19 manufacturing locations in north america, europe, africa, the middle east ("eame"), asia and australia. these production capacities
are as follows: 
 
























 
 
current capacity 
 


product area




 
 
north
america 
 
eame 
 
apac(1) 
 
total 
 


 
 
(millions of pounds)
 


performance specialties
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


amines
 
 
706
 
 
186
(2)
 
57
 
 
949
 


carbonates
 
 
77
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
77
 


specialty surfactants
 
 
178
 
 
106
 
 
77
 
 
361
 


performance intermediates
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


eg
 
 
890
 
 
 
 
 
55
 
 
945
 


eo
 
 
1,000
 
 
 
 
 
100
 
 
1,100
 


ethanolamines
 
 
400
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
400
 


ethylene
 
 
400
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
400
 


lab
 
 
400
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
400
 


propylene
 
 
300
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
300
 


surfactants
 
 
470
 
 
1,528
 
 
72
 
 
2,070
 


maleic anhydride
 
 
340
 
 
243
(3)
 
 
 
 
583
 







 

 
(1)asia-pacific
region including india ("apac")
(2)includes
up to 30 million pounds of ethyleneamines that are made available from dow's terneuzen, the netherlands facility by way of a
long-term supply arrangement and 60 million pounds from our consolidated 50/50 joint venture arabian amines company located in jubail, saudi arabia.
(3)represents
total capacity of a facility owned by sasol-huntsman gmbh and co. kg ("sasol-huntsman"), of which we own a 50% equity interest and
sasol owns the remaining 50% interest. we have consolidated the financial results of this entity since april 2011. 
 
14




 


table of contents

our
surfactants and amines facilities are located globally, with broad capabilities in amination, sulfonation and ethoxylation. these facilities have a competitive cost base and use
modern manufacturing units that allow for flexibility in production capabilities and technical innovation. through the major restructuring of our surfactant operations, we have significantly improved
the competitiveness of our surfactants business. 

our
primary ethylene, propylene, eo, eg and ethanolamines facilities are located in port neches, texas alongside our polyurethanes' po/mtbe facility. the port neches, texas facility
benefits from extensive logistics infrastructure, which allows for efficient sourcing of other raw materials and distribution of finished products. 

a
number of our facilities are located within large integrated petrochemical manufacturing complexes. we believe this results in greater scale and lower costs for our products than we
would be able to obtain if these facilities were stand-alone operations. these include our lab facility in chocolate
bayou, texas, our maleic anhydride facilities in pensacola, florida and moers, germany and our ethyleneamines facility in freeport, texas. 


joint ventures  

ethyleneamines joint venture.    in 2008, we formed arabian amines company, a 50/50 joint venture with the zamil group, which has
constructed an
ethyleneamines manufacturing plant in jubail, saudi arabia. production commenced in 2010. the plant has an approximate annual capacity of 60 million pounds. we purchase and sell all of the
production from this joint venture. arabian amines company was accounted for under the equity method during its development stage. we began consolidating this joint venture beginning july 1,
2010. 

maleic anhydride joint venture.    since the second quarter of 2011, we have consolidated the results of sasol-huntsman, our 50/50 maleic
anhydride
joint venture. this entity operates a manufacturing facility in moers, germany with the capacity to produce 243 million pounds of maleic anhydride. the output from the facility is sold in the
european region. 

raw materials  

we have the capacity to use approximately 850 million pounds of ethylene each year produced in part at our port neches, texas
facility in the production of eo and ethyleneamines. we consume all of our eo in the manufacture of our eg, surfactants and amines products. we also use internally produced po and deg in the
manufacture of these products. we have the capacity to produce 400 million pounds of ethylene and 300 million pounds of propylene, depending on feedstocks, at our port neches, texas
facility. all of the ethylene is used in the production of eo and substantially all of the propylene is consumed by the po unit at port neches operated by our polyurethanes business. we purchase or
toll the remainder of our ethylene and propylene requirements from third parties. 

in
addition to internally produced raw materials, our performance specialties market purchases over 250 compounds in varying quantities, the largest of which includes ethylene
dichloride, caustic soda,
synthetic alcohols, paraffin, nonyl phenol, ammonia, hydrogen, methylamines and acrylonitrile. the majority of these raw materials are available from multiple sources in the merchant market at
competitive prices. 

in
our performance intermediates market, our primary raw materials, in addition to internally produced and third-party sourced eo and ethylene, are synthetic and natural alcohols,
paraffin, alpha olefins, benzene and nonyl phenol. all of these raw materials are widely available in the merchant market at competitive prices. 


maleic
anhydride is produced by the reaction of n-butane with oxygen using our proprietary catalyst. the principal raw material is n-butane which is purchased
pursuant to long-term contracts and 

15




 

table of contents

delivered
to our pensacola, florida site by barge, to our facility in geismar, louisiana via pipeline and to our moers, germany site by railcar. our maleic anhydride catalyst is
toll-manufactured by a third party under a long-term contract according to our proprietary methods. these raw materials are available from multiple sources at competitive
prices. 

competition  

in our performance specialties market, there are few competitors for many of our products due to the considerable customization of
product formulations, the proprietary nature of many of our product applications and manufacturing processes and the relatively high research and development and technical costs involved. some of our
global competitors include basf, air products, dow, tosoh and akzo. we compete primarily on the basis of product performance, new product innovation and, to a lesser extent, on the basis of price. 


there
are numerous global producers of many of our performance intermediates products. our main competitors include global companies such as dow, sasol, basf, petresa, clariant, shell,
stepan, croda and kao, as well as various smaller or more local competitors. we compete on the basis of price with respect to the majority of our product offerings and, to a lesser degree, on the
basis of product availability, performance and service with respect to certain of our more value-added products. 

in
our maleic anhydride market, we compete primarily on the basis of price, customer service and plant location. our competitors include lanxess, flint hills resources, bartek, and
ashland. we are the leading global producer of maleic anhydride catalyst. competitors in our maleic anhydride catalyst market include scientific design, ineos, basf, and polynt. in our maleic
anhydride technology licensing market, our primary competitor is scientific design. we compete primarily on the basis of technological performance and service. 

the
market in which our performance products segment operates is highly competitive. among our competitors in this market are some of the world's largest chemical companies and major
integrated petroleum companies that have their own raw material resources. some of these companies may be able to produce products more economically than we can. in addition, some of our competitors
in this market have greater financial resources, which may enable them to invest significant capital into their businesses, including expenditures for research and development. if any of our current
or future competitors in this market develop proprietary technology that enables them to produce products at a significantly lower cost, our technology could be rendered uneconomical or obsolete. 

advanced materials  

general  

our advanced materials segment is a leading global manufacturer and marketer of technologically advanced epoxy, acrylic and
polyurethane-based polymer products. we focus on formulations and systems that are used to address customer-specific needs in a wide variety of industrial and consumer applications. our products are
used either as replacements for traditional materials or in applications where traditional materials do not meet demanding engineering specifications. for example, structural adhesives are used to
replace metal rivets and advanced composites are used to replace traditional aluminum panels in the manufacture of aerospace components. our advanced materials segment is characterized by the breadth
of our product offering, our expertise in complex chemistry, our long-standing relationships with our customers, our ability to develop and adapt our technology and our applications
expertise for new markets and new applications. 

16






 



































  
table of contents 

we operate synthesis, formulating and production facilities in north america, europe, asia, south america and africa. we sell to more than 3,000 customers in the
following end-markets: civil engineering, consumer appliances, food and beverage packaging, industrial appliances, consumer/do it yourself ("diy"), aerospace, dvd, lng transport,
electrical power transmission and distribution, printed circuit boards, consumer and industrial electronics, wind power generation, automotive, recreational sports equipment, medical appliances. 

during
2011, we implemented a restructuring program to reorganize our advanced materials global business structure and to relocate our divisional headquarters to the woodlands, texas. in
connection with this plan, we recorded net charges of $20 million primarily for workforce reduction. we expect to incur additional restructuring and plant closing charges of approximately
$1 million in 2012 related to this program. 

on
november 1, 2011, we completed the sale of our stereolithography resin and digitalis® machine manufacturing businesses to 3d systems corporation for
$41 million in cash. the stereolithography business had revenues of $7 million in 2010 and its products are used primarily in three-dimensional part building systems. the
digitalis® business is a stereolithography rapid manufacturing system previously under development by our advanced materials business. 


products and markets  

our product range spans from basic liquid and solid resins, to specialty components like curing agents, matting agents, accelerators,
cross-linkers, reactive diluents, thermoplastic polyamides and additives. in addition to these components, which we typically sell to formulators in various industries, we also produce and sell ready
to use formulated polymer systems. 

base resins and specialty component markets.    our products are used for the protection of steel and concrete substrates, such as
flooring, metal
furniture and appliances, buildings, linings for storage tanks and food and beverage cans, and the primer coat of automobile bodies and ships. epoxy-based surface coatings are among the most widely
used industrial coatings due to their structural stability and broad application functionality combined with overall economic efficiency. 

base
resins and specialty components are also used for composite applications. a structural composite is made by combining two or more different materials, such as fibers, resins and
other specialty additives, to create a product with enhanced structural properties. specifically, structural composites are lightweight, high-strength, rigid materials with high resistance
to chemicals, moisture and high temperatures. our product range comprises basic and advanced epoxy resins, curing agents and other advanced chemicals, additives and formulated polymer systems. the
four key target markets for our structural composites are aerospace, windmill blades for wind power generation, general industrial and automotive applications, and recreational products (mainly sports
equipment such as skis). structural composites continue to substitute for traditional materials, such as metals and wood, in a wide variety of applications due to their light weight, strength and
durability. 

formulated systems.    the structural adhesives market requires high-strength "engineering" adhesives for use in the manufacture
and repair
of items to bond various engineering substrates. our business focus is on engineering adhesives based on epoxy, polyurethane, acrylic and other technologies which are used to bond materials, such as
steel, aluminum, engineering plastics and composites in substitution of traditional joining techniques. our araldite® brand name has considerable value in the industrial and consumer
adhesives markets. in many countries, araldite® branded products are known for their high-performance adhesive capabilities, and we generally believe that this is the
value-added segment of the market where recognition of our long-standing araldite® brand is a key competitive advantage. packaging is a key characteristic of our adhesives
products. our range of adhesives is sold in 

17




 

table of contents

a
variety of packs and sizes, targeted to three specific end-markets and sold through targeted routes to market: 



•general industrial bonding.  we sell a broad range of
advanced formulated adhesives to a broad base of small-to medium-sized customers, including specialist distributors.   
•industry specific.  we sell our adhesive products on a
global basis into diverse, industry-specific markets, which include the aerospace, wind turbine, lng transport, filterbonding, solar cell and other industrial applications markets. our target markets
are chosen because we believe it is worthwhile to utilize our direct sales force and applications experts to tailor products and services to suit the needs and performance specifications of the
specific market segments.   
•consumer/diy.  we package and sell consumer adhesives
through strategic distribution arrangements with a number of the major marketers of consumer/diy adhesives, such as vynex, velcro and selleys. these products are sold globally through a number of
major retail outlets, often under the araldite® brand name. 


our
electrical materials are formulated polymer systems, which make up the insulation materials used in equipment for the generation, transmission and distribution of electrical power,
such as transformers, switch gears, ignition coils, sensors, motors and magnets, and for the protection of electrical and electronic devices and components. the purpose of these products is to
insulate, protect or shield either the environment from electrical current or electrical devices from the environment, such as temperature or humidity. our electrical insulating materials target two
key market segments: the heavy electrical equipment market and the light electrical equipment market. 

products
for the heavy electrical equipment market segment are used in power plant components, devices for power grids and insulating parts and components. in addition, there are
numerous devices, such as motors and magnetic coils used in trains and medical equipment, which are manufactured using epoxy and related technologies. products for the light electrical equipment
market segment are used in applications such as industrial automation and control, consumer electronics, car electronics and electrical components. the end customers in the electrical insulating
materials market encompass the relevant original equipment manufacturer ("oem") as well as numerous manufacturers of components used in the final products. we also develop, manufacture and market
materials used in the production
of printed circuit boards. our products are ultimately used in industries ranging from telecommunications and personal computer mother board manufacture to automotive electronic systems manufacture.
soldermasks are our most important product line in printed circuit board technologies. sales are made mainly under the probimer®, probimage® and probelec®
trademarks. our probimer® trademark is a widely recognized brand name for soldermasks. 

sales and marketing  

we maintain multiple routes to market to service our diverse customer base. these routes to market range from using our own direct
sales force for targeted, technically-oriented distribution to mass general distribution. our direct sales force focuses on engineering solutions for decision-makers at major customers who purchase
significant amounts of product from us. we use technically-oriented specialist distributors to augment our sales effort in niche markets and applications where we do not believe it is appropriate to
develop direct sales resources. we use mass general distribution channels to sell our products into a wide range of general applications where technical expertise is less important to the user of the
products to reduce our overall selling expenses. we believe our use of multiple routes to market enables us to reach a broader customer base at an efficient cost. 

we
conduct sales activities through dedicated regional sales teams in the americas, eamei, and asia. our global customers are covered by key account managers who are familiar with the
specific requirements of these clients. the management of long-standing customer relationships, some of which 

18




 

table of contents

are
20 to 30 years old, is at the heart of the sales and marketing process. we are also supported by a strong network of distributors. we serve a highly fragmented customer base. 

for
our consumer/diy range, we have entered into exclusive branding and distribution arrangements with, for example, selleys in australia. under these arrangements, our distribution
partners fund advertising and sales promotions, negotiate and sell to major retail chains, own inventories and provide store deliveries (and sometimes shelf merchandising) in exchange for a reliable,
high-quality supply of araldite® branded, ready-to-sell packaged products. 


manufacturing and operations  

we are a global business serving customers in four principal geographic regions: europe, india, middle east & africa, the
americas, and asia. to service our customers efficiently, we maintain manufacturing plants around the world with a strategy of global, regional and local manufacturing employed to optimize the level
of service and minimize the cost to our customers. the following table summarizes the plants that we operate: 
 













location



 
 
description of facility 


bad saeckingen, germany
 
formulating facility


bergkamen, germany
 
synthesis facility


chennai, india(1)
 
resins and synthesis facility


duxford, u.k. 
 
formulating facility


east lansing, michigan, u.s. 
 
formulating facility


istanbul, turkey(2)
 
formulating facility


los angeles, california, u.s. 
 
formulating facility


mcintosh, alabama, u.s. 
 
resins and synthesis facility


monthey, switzerland
 
resins and synthesis facility


pamplona, spain
 
resins and synthesis facility


panyu, china(2)(3)
 
formulation and synthesis facility


sadat city, egypt
 
formulating facility


taboão da serra, brazil
 
formulating facility







 

 
(1)76%-owned
and consolidated manufacturing joint venture with tamilnadu petroproducts limited.
(2)leased
land and/or building.
(3)95%-owned
and consolidated manufacturing joint venture with guangdong panyu shilou town economic development co. ltd. 
 
our
facilities in asia and india are well-positioned to take advantage of the market growth that is expected in these regions. 

raw materials  

the principal raw materials we purchase for the manufacture of basic and advanced epoxy resins are epichlorohydrin, bisphenol a and
blr. we also purchase amines, polyols, isocyanates, acrylic materials, hardeners and fillers for the production of our formulated polymer systems and complex chemicals and additives. raw material
costs constitute a sizeable percentage of sales for certain applications. we have supply contracts with a number of suppliers. the terms of our supply contracts vary, but, in general, these contracts
contain provisions that set forth the quantities of product to be supplied and purchased and formula-based pricing. 

19




 


table of contents

additionally,
we produce some of our most important raw materials, such as blr and its basic derivatives, which are the basic building blocks of many of our products. we are the six
largest producer of blr in the world. approximately 50% of the blr we produce is consumed in the production of our formulated polymer systems. the balance of our blr is sold as liquid or solid resin
in the merchant market, allowing us to increase the utilization of our production plants and lower our overall blr production cost. we believe that manufacturing a substantial proportion of our
principal raw material gives us a competitive advantage over other epoxy-based polymer systems formulators,
most of whom must buy blr from third-party suppliers. this position helps protect us from pricing pressure from blr suppliers and aids in providing us a stable supply of blr in difficult market
conditions. 

we
consume certain amines produced by our performance products segment and isocyanates produced by our polyurethanes segment, which we use to formulate advanced materials products. 

competition  

the market in which our advanced materials segment operates is highly competitive, and is dependent on significant capital investment,
the development of proprietary technology, and maintenance of product research and development. among our competitors in this market are some of the world's largest chemical companies and major
integrated companies that have their own raw material resources. 

competition
in our basic liquid and solid epoxy resins group is primarily driven by price, and is increasingly more global with industry consolidation in the north american and european
markets and the emergence of new competitors in asia. our major competitors include dow, momentive, basf, kukdo and nanya. 

competition
in our specialty components and structural composites product group is primarily driven by product performance, applications expertise and customer certification. our
competitive strengths include our strong technology base, broad range of value-added products, leading market positions, diverse customer base and reputation for customer service. major competitors
include air products, arizona, momentive, basf, cray valley, evonics, dic, dow, mitsui, sumitomo and nanya. 

competition
in our formulation product group is primarily based on technology, know-how, applications and formulations expertise, product reliability and performance, process
expertise and technical support. this product group covers a wide range of industries and the key competition factors vary by industry. our competitive strengths result from our focus on defined
market needs, our long-standing customer relationships, product reliability and technical performance, provision of high level service and recognition as a quality supplier in our chosen
sectors. we operate dedicated technology centers in basel, switzerland; the woodlands, texas; and panyu, china in support of our product and technology development. our major competitors can be
summarized as follows: 
 













formulation product group



 
 
competition 


adhesives applications
 
henkel/loctite, itw, national starch, sika, 3m


electrical insulating materials
 
altana, momentive, schenectady, wuxi, dexter-hysol, hitachi chemical, nagase chemtex, toshiba chemical


printed circuit board materials
 
coates, goo, peters, taiyo ink, tamura


tooling and modeling solution. 
 
axson, dsm, sika



 
20




 

table of contents


textile effects  

general  

our textile effects segment is the leading global solutions provider for textile chemicals and dyes in our chosen markets. our textile
solutions enhance the color of finished textiles and improve such performance characteristics as wrinkle resistance and the ability to repel water and stains. our textile effects segment is
characterized by the breadth of our product offering,
our long-standing relationships with our customers, our ability to develop and adapt our technology and our applications expertise for new markets and new applications. 

we
operate synthesis, formulating and production facilities in north america, europe, asia and south america. we market multiple products to customers in multiple
end-markets, including the following: consumer fashion apparel, sportswear, career and uniform apparel, military, automotive, home textiles and furnishings, carpet and other functional
textiles. 

on
september 27, 2011, we announced plans to implement a significant restructuring of our textile effects business, including the closure of our production facilities and business
support offices in basel, switzerland, as part of an ongoing strategic program aimed at improving the textile effects business' long-term global competitiveness. in connection with this
plan during 2011, we recorded a charge of $62 million for workforce reduction and $53 million for the impairment of long-lived assets at our basel, switzerland manufacturing
facility. we expect to incur additional restructuring and plant closing charges of approximately $25 million through 2014. 

products and markets  

textiles generally involve a complex matrix of fibers, effects and functionality, and the resulting products range from fashion apparel
to bulletproof vests, home linens to carpet, and upholstery to automotive interiors. our broad range of dyestuffs and chemicals enhance both the aesthetic appearance of these products and the
functionality needed to ensure that they perform in their end-use markets. since the requirements for these markets vary dramatically, our business strategy focuses on the two major
markets—apparel and technical textiles. we work to provide the right balance of products and service to meet the technical challenges in each of these markets. 

the
apparel market, which also includes our home interiors products, focuses on products that provide an aesthetic effect and/or improve the processing efficiency within the textile
mill. we offer a complete range of colors for cotton, polyester and nylon that cover the range of shades needed for sportswear, intimate apparel, towels, sheeting and casual wear. our dyes have been
developed to ensure that they offer the highest levels of wash fastness currently available in the market. optical brighteners and other pretreatment products provide "bright white" effects for
apparel, towels and sheeting. pretreatment and dyeing auxiliaries ensure that these fabrics are processed efficiently and effectively—cleaning the fabrics with fewer chemicals, less energy
and less water and thereby minimizing the environmental footprint and reducing the processing costs. silicone softeners may be used to enhance the feel of products. 

technical
textiles include automotive textiles, carpet, military fabrics, mattress ticking and nonwoven and other technical fabrics. though the product groups may differ in their
end-uses, the
articles must provide a high-level of functionality and performance in their respective markets. high-lightfast dyes and uv absorbers are used in automotive interiors and
outdoor furnishings to provide colors that don't fade when exposed to sunlight and heat. powerful stain repellent and release technology imparts durable protection for upholstery, military and medical
fabrics, without affecting the color, breathability or feel of the fabric. specialized dyes and prints create unique camouflage patterns for military uniforms, backpacks and tarps that won't fade
through wash and wear or during exposure to the elements. 

21




 

table of contents

sales and marketing  

for our textile effects products, we focus on providing effect competence and process competence to our customers. effect
competence—delivering value-added effects to our customer's products—enables us to capitalize on new and innovative technologies and to assist our customers in their efforts to
differentiate themselves from competitors. process competence—applying know-how and expertise to improve customers' processes—allows us to utilize our technical
service to reduce cost and enhance efficiency. 

manufacturing and operations  

we are a global business serving customers in three principal geographic regions: eame, the americas and asia. to service our customers
efficiently, we maintain manufacturing plants around the world with a strategy of global, regional and local manufacturing employed to optimize the level of service and minimize the cost to our
customers. the following table summarizes the plants that we operate: 
 













location



 
 
description of facility 


atotonilquillo, mexico
 
textile dyes and chemicals formulations facility


baroda, india
 
textile dyes facility


basel, switzerland(1)
 
textile dyes facility and technology center


bogota, colombia(1)
 
chemicals formulations facility


charlotte, north carolina, u.s.(1)
 
chemicals formulations facility


fraijanes, guatemala(1)
 
chemicals formulations facility


gandaria, jakarta, indonesia
 
textile dyes and chemicals formulations facility


hangzhou, china(1)
 
chemicals formulations facility


istanbul, turkey(1)
 
chemicals formulations facility


karachi, pakistan(1)
 
chemicals formulations facility


langweid am leich, germany(1)
 
chemicals synthesis facility


panyu, china(1)(2)
 
chemicals synthesis facility and technology center


qingdao, china
 
textile dyes facility


samutsakorn (mahachai), thailand(1)
 
textile dyes and chemicals formulations facility


taboão da serra, brazil (1)
 
chemicals formulations facility







 

 
(1)leased
land and/or building.
(2)95%-owned
and consolidated manufacturing joint venture with guangdong panyu shilou town economic development co. ltd. 
 
raw materials  

the manufacture of textile effects products requires a wide selection of raw materials (approximately 1,100 different chemicals),
including amines, fluorochemicals and sulfones. no one raw material represents greater than 3% of our textile effects raw material expenditures. raw material costs constitute a sizeable percentage of
sales for certain applications. we have supply contracts with a number of suppliers. the terms of our supply contracts vary, but, in general, these contracts contain provisions that set forth the
quantities of product to be supplied and purchased and formula-based pricing. 

22




 

table of contents

competition  

we are the leading global solutions provider for textile chemicals and dyes in our chosen markets. competition within the textile
chemicals and dyes markets is generally fragmented with few competitors who offer complete solutions for both markets. our major competitors are clariant, basf, kiri-dystar and longsheng.
we believe that our competitive strengths include our product offering, which is characterized by its broad range; high quality; significant integration between products and service; reliable
technical expertise;
long-standing relationships with customers; and strong business infrastructure in asia. we believe that we have more customer service capability and account management capability than any
of our competitors worldwide. 

pigments  

general  


we are a global leader in the creation of titanium dioxide solutions. titanium dioxide is a white inert pigment which provides
whiteness, opacity and brightness to thousands of everyday items including paints, plastics, paper, inks, food and personal care products. 

expertise
gained over 75 years combined with a pioneering spirit enable us to help our customers to succeed. we use our expertise in titanium dioxide to create solutions for our
customers that can deliver much more than whiteness and opacity including freeing capacity, reducing energy use and enabling infrastructure to last longer. our tioxide® and
deltio® brands are made in our seven manufacturing facilities around the globe and service over 1,200 customers in practically all industries and geographic regions. our global
manufacturing footprint allows us to service both the needs of local and global customers, including ampacet, a. schulman, akzo nobel, basf, cabot, clariant, jotun, polyone and ppg. 

our
pigments segment is focused on working with customers to create innovative solutions that will help them succeed and improving our competitive position. for example, our award
winning range of free flow deltio® pigments, helps our customers improve their working environments and reduce energy consumption. 

in
addition, we are focused on manufacturing efficiencies. in 2011 we approved the investment of approximately $40 million at our calais site to build a new magnesium sulfate
fertilizer manufacturing operation that will increase the efficiency, sustainability and cost effectiveness of the site. this will be operation in 2013 and we continue to pursue other projects to
improve manufacturing costs at each of our facilities. 

products and markets  

historically, global titanium dioxide demand growth rates tend to closely track global gdp growth rates. however, this varies by
region. developed markets such as the u.s. and western europe exhibit higher absolute consumption but lower demand growth rates, while emerging markets such as asia exhibit much higher demand growth
rates. the titanium dioxide industry experiences some seasonality in its sales reflecting the high exposure to seasonal coatings end use markets. coating sales generally peak during the spring and
summer months in the northern hemisphere, resulting in greater sales volumes during the second and third quarters of the year. 

there
are two manufacturing processes for the production of titanium dioxide, the sulfate process and the chloride process. we currently believe that the chloride process accounts for
approximately 55% of global production capacity. most end use applications can use pigments produced by either process, although there are markets that need pigment from a specific manufacturing route
i.e. the inks market for sulfate and the automotive coatings market for chloride. regional markets typically favor products that are available locally. 

23




 

table of contents

aside
from the five major producers which include huntsman, the titanium dioxide industry currently has a large number of small regional or local producers, especially in china. titanium
dioxide supply has historically kept pace with increases in demand as producers increased capacity through low cost incremental debottlenecks, efficiency improvements and, more recently, new capacity
additions in china. during periods of low titanium dioxide demand, the industry experiences high stock levels and consequently reduces production to manage working capital. pricing in the industry is
driven primarily by supply/demand balance. based upon current price levels and the long lead times for planning, governmental approvals and construction, we expect supply additions for the near term
in line with historical demand growth. 

sales and marketing  

approximately 85% of our titanium dioxide sales are made through our global sales and technical services network, enabling us to work
closely with our customers. our focused sales effort and local manufacturing presence have allowed us to achieve leading market shares in a number of the countries where we manufacture titanium
dioxide. 

in
addition, we have focused on marketing products and services to higher growth and higher value applications. for example, we believe that our pigments business is
well-positioned to benefit from growth sectors where customers needs are complex resulting in less companies having the capability to support them. 

we
focus a lot of research and development in the creation of solutions that can help to address the megatrends that we see emerging as evidenced by our deltio® pigments
range which helps our customers to liberate capacity, reduce energy, improve working environments and reduce waste. 

manufacturing and operations  


our pigments business has seven manufacturing sites operating in seven countries with a total capacity of approximately 565,000 tonnes
per year. approximately 72% of our titanium dioxide capacity is located in western europe. 
 






















 
 
annual capacity (metric tons) 
 
 


site



 
 
eame 
 
north
america 
 
apac 
 
process 


greatham, u.k. 
 
 
150,000
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
chloride


calais, france
 
 
95,000
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sulfate


huelva, spain
 
 
80,000
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sulfate


scarlino, italy
 
 
80,000
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sulfate


umbogintwini, south africa
 
 
25,000
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sulfate


lake charles, louisiana(1)
 
 
 
 
 
75,000
 
 
 
 
chloride


teluk kalung, malaysia
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
60,000
 
sulfate


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
 
430,000
 
 
75,000
 
 
60,000
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 







 

 
(1)this
facility is owned and operated by louisiana pigment company, l.p., a manufacturing joint venture that is owned 50% by us and 50% by kronos
worldwide. the capacity shown reflects our 50% interest in louisiana pigment company, l.p. 
 
in
2011 we announced an investment of approximately €30 million (approximately $40 million) to build a new magnesium sulfate fertilizer manufacturing
operation at our plant in calais, france. the new facility will enable the closure of part of our calais effluent treatment plant, which is expected to increase the efficiency, sustainability and cost
effectiveness of the entire calais site. 

24






 




































 
table of contents 

joint venture  

louisiana pigment company, l.p. is our 50/50 joint venture with kronos worldwide. we share production offtake and operating
costs of the plant equally with kronos worldwide, though we market our share of the production independently. the operations of the joint venture are under the direction of a supervisory committee on
which each partner has equal representation. our investment in louisiana pigment company, l.p. is accounted for using the equity method. 


raw materials  

the primary raw materials used to produce titanium dioxide are titanium bearing ores. historically we have purchased the majority of
our ore under long-term supply contracts with a number of ore suppliers. the majority of titanium bearing ores are sourced from australia, africa and canada. ore accounts for approximately
45% of pigment variable
manufacturing costs, while utilities (electricity, gas and steam), sulfuric acid and chlorine collectively account for approximately 30% of our variable manufacturing costs. 

the
world market for titanium bearing ores has a small number of large suppliers (rio tinto, iluka and exxaro) which account for approximately 50% of global supply and from which we
purchase approximately 60% of our needs. however, the choice of producers has increased in recent years with a number of emerging suppliers and we have broadened our supply base by purchasing
increasing amounts of our ores from these suppliers. the titanium-bearing ores market is in the process of moving from long-term supply contracts with pricing formulas to
short-term contracts with market based prices. as a result of this shift we expect to see a significant increase in our ore costs as our existing contracts expire. during 2012,
approximately 50% of our ore will be purchased under existing long-term contracts and the remainder under new shorter-term contracts. 

titanium
dioxide producers extract titanium from ores and process it into pigmentary titanium dioxide using either the chloride or sulfate process. once an intermediate titanium dioxide
pigment has been produced, it is "finished" into a product with specific performance characteristics for particular end use applications. the finishing process is common to both the sulfate and
chloride processes and is a major determinant of the final product's performance characteristics. 

co-products
from both processes require treatment prior to disposal in order to comply with environmental regulations. in order to reduce our disposal costs and to increase
our cost competitiveness, we have developed and marketed the co-products of our pigments business. we sell over 50% of the co-products generated by our business. 


competition  

the global markets in which our pigments business operates are highly competitive. competition is based on the basis of price, product
quality and service. the major global producers against whom we compete are dupont, tronox, kronos and cristal, each of which has a global presence and the ability to service all global markets. some
of our competitors may be able to produce products more economically than we can. in addition, some of our competitors in this market have greater financial resources, which may enable them to invest
significant capital into their businesses, including expenditures for research and development. if any of our current or future competitors in this market develops proprietary technology that enables
them to produce products at a significantly lower cost, our technology could be rendered uneconomical or obsolete. moreover, the sulphate based titanium dioxide technology used by our pigments
business is widely available. accordingly, barriers to entry, apart from capital availability, may be low and the entrance of new competitors into the industry may reduce our ability to capture
improving profit margins in circumstances where capacity utilization in the industry is increasing. 

25




 

table of contents

research and development  

for the years ended december 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009, we spent $166 million, $151 million and $145 million,
respectively, on research and development. 

we
support our business with a major commitment to research and development, technical services and process engineering improvement. our research and development centers are located in
the woodlands, texas; everberg, belgium; and shanghai, china. other regional development/technical service centers are located in billingham, england (pigments); auburn hills, michigan (polyurethanes
for the automotive industry); derry, new hampshire, shanghai, china, deggendorf, germany and ternate, italy (polyurethanes); melbourne, australia (surfactants); port neches, texas (process engineering
support); basel, switzerland and panyu, china (advanced materials and textile effects) and mumbai, india (textile effects). 

intellectual property rights  

proprietary protection of our processes, apparatuses, and other technology and inventions is important to our businesses. we own
approximately 465 unexpired u.s. patents, approximately 155 patent applications (including provisionals) currently pending at the u.s. patent and trademark office, and approximately 3,625
foreign counterparts, including both issued patents and pending patent applications. while a presumption of validity exists with respect to issued u.s. patents, we cannot assure that any of our
patents will not be challenged, invalidated, circumvented or rendered unenforceable. furthermore, we cannot assure the issuance of any pending patent application, or that if patents do issue, that
these patents will provide meaningful protection against competitors or against competitive technologies. additionally, our competitors or other third parties may obtain patents that restrict or
preclude our ability to lawfully produce or sell our products in a competitive manner. 


we
also rely upon unpatented proprietary know-how and continuing technological innovation and other trade secrets to develop and maintain our competitive position. there can
be no assurance, however, that confidentiality agreements into which we enter and have entered will not be breached, that they will provide meaningful protection for our trade secrets or proprietary
know-how, or that adequate remedies will be available in the event of an unauthorized
use or disclosure of such trade secrets and know-how. in addition, there can be no assurance that others will not obtain knowledge of these trade secrets through independent development or
other access by legal means. 

in
addition to our own patents and patent applications and proprietary trade secrets and know-how, we are a party to certain licensing arrangements and other agreements
authorizing us to use trade secrets, know-how and related technology and/or operate within the scope of certain patents owned by other entities. we also have licensed or
sub-licensed intellectual property rights to third parties. 

we
have associated brand names with a number of our products, and we have approximately 165 u.s. trademark registrations (including applications for registration currently pending
at the u.s. patent and trademark office), and approximately 4,725 foreign counterparts, including both registrations and applications for registration. some of these registrations and applications
include filings under the madrid system for the international registration of marks and may confer rights in multiple countries. however, there can be no assurance that the trademark registrations
will provide meaningful protection against the use of similar trademarks by competitors, or that the value of our trademarks will not be diluted. 

because
of the breadth and nature of our intellectual property rights and our business, we do not believe that any single intellectual property right (other than certain trademarks for
which we intend to maintain the applicable registrations) is material to our business. moreover, we do not believe that the termination of intellectual property rights expected to occur over the next
several years, either 

26




 

table of contents

individually
or in the aggregate, will materially adversely affect our business, financial condition or results of operations. 

employees  

as of december 31, 2011, we employed approximately 12,000 people in our operations around the world. approximately 2,000 of
these employees are located in the u.s., while approximately 10,000 are located in other countries. we believe our relations with our employees are good. 

environmental, health and safety matters  

general  

we are subject to extensive federal, state, local and international laws, regulations, rules and ordinances relating to safety,
pollution, protection of the environment, product management and distribution, and the generation, storage, handling, transportation, treatment, disposal and remediation of hazardous substances and
waste materials. in the ordinary course of business, we are subject to frequent environmental inspections and monitoring and occasional investigations by governmental enforcement authorities. in
addition, our production facilities require operating permits that are subject to renewal, modification and, in certain circumstances, revocation. actual or alleged violations of safety laws,
environmental laws or permit requirements could result in restrictions or prohibitions on plant operations or product distribution, substantial civil or criminal sanctions, as well as, under some
environmental laws, the assessment of strict liability and/or joint and several liability. moreover, changes in environmental regulations could inhibit or interrupt our operations, or require us to
modify our facilities or operations. accordingly, environmental or regulatory matters may cause us to incur significant unanticipated losses, costs or liabilities. 

environmental, health and safety systems  

we are committed to achieving and maintaining compliance with all applicable environmental, health and safety ("ehs") legal
requirements, and we have developed policies and management systems that are intended to identify the multitude of ehs legal requirements applicable to our operations, enhance compliance with
applicable legal requirements, ensure the safety of our employees, contractors, community neighbors and customers and minimize the production and emission of wastes and other pollutants. although ehs
legal requirements are constantly changing and are frequently difficult to comply with, these ehs management systems are designed to assist us in our compliance goals while also fostering efficiency
and improvement and minimizing overall risk to us. 

ehs capital expenditures  

we may incur future costs for capital improvements and general compliance under ehs laws, including costs to acquire, maintain and
repair pollution control equipment. for the years ended december 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009, our capital expenditures for ehs matters totaled $92 million, $85 million, and
$54 million, respectively. because capital expenditures for these matters are subject to evolving regulatory requirements and depend, in part, on the timing, promulgation and enforcement of
specific requirements, our capital expenditures for ehs matters have varied significantly from year to year and we cannot provide assurance that our recent expenditures will be indicative of future
amounts required under ehs laws. 

remediation liabilities  

we have incurred, and we may in the future incur, liability to investigate and clean up waste or contamination at our current or former
facilities or facilities operated by third parties at which we may have disposed of waste or other materials. similarly, we may incur costs for the cleanup of waste that 

27




 

table of contents

was
disposed of prior to the purchase of our businesses. under some circumstances, the scope of our liability may extend to damages to natural resources. 

under
the comprehensive environmental response, compensation and liability act ("cercla") and similar state laws, a current or former owner or operator of real property may be liable for
remediation costs regardless of whether the release or disposal of hazardous substances was in compliance with law at the time it occurred, and a current owner or operator may be liable regardless of
whether it owned or operated the facility at the time of the release. outside the u.s., analogous contaminated property laws, such as those in effect in france and australia, can hold past owners
and/or operators liable for remediation at former facilities. we have been notified by third parties of claims against us for cleanup liabilities at approximately 10 former facilities or third party
sites, including, but not limited to, sites listed under cercla. based on current information and past experiences at other cercla sites, we do not expect any of these third party claims to result in
material liability to us. 

one
of these sites, the north maybe canyon mine cercla site, includes an abandoned phosphorous mine near soda springs, idaho believed to have been operated by one of our predecessor
companies (el paso products company). in 2004, the u.s. forest service notified us that we are a cercla potentially responsible party (a "prp") for the mine site involving selenium contaminated
surface water. under a 2004 administrative order, the current mine lessee, nu-west industries, inc., began undertaking the investigation required for a cercla removal process. in
2008, the site was transitioned to the cercla remedial action process, which requires a remedial investigation/feasibility study (an "ri/fs"). in 2009, the forest service notified the three prps (our
company, nu-west and wells cargo) that it would undertake the ri/fs itself. on february 19, 2010, in conjunction with wells cargo, we agreed to jointly comply with a unilateral
administrative order (a "uao") to conduct an ri/fs of the entire west ridge of the site, although we are alleged to have had only a limited historical presence in the investigation area. in march
2010, following the initiation of litigation by nu-west, the forest service assumed nu-west's original investigation obligations. on june 15, 2010, we received the uao
which had been executed by the forest service and we are presently carrying out the requirements of the order. we continue to coordinate with our insurers regarding policy coverage in this matter. at
this time, we do not believe the costs to remediate this site will be material to our financial statements. 

in
addition, under the resource conservation and recovery act ("rcra") and similar state laws, we may be required to remediate contamination originating from our properties as a
condition to our hazardous waste permit. some of our manufacturing sites have an extended history of industrial chemical manufacturing and use, including on-site waste disposal. we are
aware of soil, groundwater or surface contamination from past operations at some of our sites, and we may find contamination at other sites in the future. for example, our port neches, texas, and
geismar, louisiana, facilities are the subject of ongoing remediation requirements under rcra authority. similar laws exist in a number of locations in which we currently operate, or previously
operated, manufacturing facilities, such as australia, switzerland and italy. 

in
june of 2006, an agreement was reached between the local regulatory authorities and our advanced materials site in pamplona, spain to relocate our manufacturing operations in order to
facilitate new urban development desired by the city. subsequently, as required by the authorities, soil and groundwater sampling was performed and followed by a quantitative risk assessment. in
october 2010, the local authorities approved our proposed two-phase remedial approach. the first phase was installed in 2011 and involves groundwater extraction and treatment in one
limited area of the site. the second phase, not yet defined, would proceed during site redevelopment. as the second phase remediation has not yet been defined, we are unable to assess our potential
liability. 

28




 


table of contents

by
letter dated march 7, 2006, our base chemicals and polymers facility in west footscray, australia, was issued a clean-up notice by the environment protection
authority, victoria, australia (the "epa victoria") due to concerns about soil and groundwater contamination emanating from the site. the agency revoked the original clean-up notice on
september 4, 2007 and
issued a revised clean-up notice due to "the complexity of contamination issues" at the site. in the third quarter of 2009, we recorded a $30 million liability related to estimated
environmental remediation costs at this site. on august 23, 2010, epa victoria revoked the second clean-up notice and issued a revised notice that included a requirement for
financial assurance for the remediation. we have reached agreement with the agency that a mortgage on the land will be held by the agency as financial surety during the period covered by the current
clean-up notice, which ends on july 30, 2014. we can provide no assurance that the agency will not seek to institute additional requirements for the site or that additional costs
will not be associated with the clean up. this facility has been closed and demolished. 

by
letter dated march 15, 2010, the u.s. department of justice (the "doj") notified us that the u.s. environmental protection agency (the "epa") has requested that the doj bring
an action in federal court against us and other prps for recovery of costs incurred by the u.s. in connection with releases of hazardous substances from the state marine superfund site in port arthur,
texas. as of august 31, 2007, the epa had incurred and paid approximately $2.8 million in unreimbursed response costs related to the site. prior to filing the complaint, the doj
requested that prps sign and return a standard tolling agreement (from march 31, 2010 through september 30, 2010) and participate in settlement discussions. we originally responded to an
information request regarding this site on march 7, 2005 and identified historical transactions associated with a predecessor of a company we acquired. the prior owners have contractually
agreed to indemnify us in this matter. while the doj is aware of the indemnity, we may be required to participate in future settlement discussions; therefore, on march 29, 2010, we submitted
the signed tolling agreement and offer to negotiate to the doj. the tolling agreement has since been extended three times, most recently through january 31, 2012. in a direct final rule
published december 6, 2011, epa region 6 announced that it is delisting this superfund site from the national priorities list. 

in
many cases, our potential liability arising from historical contamination is based on operations and other events occurring prior to our ownership of a business or specific facility.
in these situations, we frequently obtained an indemnity agreement from the prior owner addressing remediation liabilities arising from pre-closing conditions. we have successfully
exercised our rights under these contractual covenants for a number of sites and, where applicable, mitigated our ultimate remediation liability. we cannot assure you, however, that the liabilities
for all such matters subject to indemnity, will be honored by the prior owner or that our existing indemnities will be sufficient to cover our liabilities for such matters. 

based
on available information and the indemnification rights we believe are likely to be available, we believe that the costs to investigate and remediate known contamination will not
have a material effect on our financial statements. however, if such indemnities are not honored or do not fully cover the costs of investigation and remediation or we are required to contribute to
such costs, then such expenditures may have a material effect on our financial statements. at the current time, we are unable to estimate the total cost, exclusive of indemnification benefits, to
remediate any of the known contamination sites. 

environmental reserves  

we have accrued liabilities relating to anticipated environmental cleanup obligations, site reclamation and closure costs and known
penalties. liabilities are recorded when potential liabilities are either known or considered probable and can be reasonably estimated. our liability estimates are calculated using present value
techniques as appropriate and are based upon requirements placed upon us by regulators, available facts, existing technology and past experience. the environmental liabilities 

29




 

table of contents

do
not include amounts recorded as asset retirement obligations. we had accrued $36 million and $48 million for environmental liabilities as of december 31, 2011 and 2010,
respectively. of these amounts, $7 million and $13 million were classified as accrued liabilities in our consolidated balance sheets as of december 31, 2011 and 2010,
respectively, and $29 million and $35 million were classified as other noncurrent liabilities in our consolidated balance sheets as of december 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. in
certain cases, our remediation liabilities may be payable over periods of up to 30 years. we may incur losses for environmental remediation in excess of the amounts accrued; however, we are not
able to estimate the amount or range of such potential excess. 

regulatory developments  

on june 1, 2007, the european union's (eu) regulatory framework for chemicals called registration, evaluation and authorization
of chemicals ("reach") took effect, designed to be phased in over 11 years. as a reach-regulated company that manufactures in or imports more than one metric ton per year of a chemical
substance into the european economic area ("eea"), we were required to pre-register with the european chemicals agency, echa, such chemical substances and isolated intermediates to take
advantage of the 11 year phase-in period. to meet our compliance obligations, a cross-business reach team was established, through which we were able to fulfill all required
pre-registrations and our first phase registrations by the november 30, 2010 deadline. while we continue our registration efforts to meet the next registration deadline of june
2013, our reach implementation team is now strategically focused on the authorization phase of the reach process, directing its efforts to address "substances of very high concern" and evaluating
potential business implications. where warranted, evaluation of substitute chemicals will be an important element of our ongoing manufacturing sustainability efforts. as a chemical manufacturer with
global operations, we are also actively monitoring and addressing analogous regulatory regimes being considered or implemented outside of the eu. 


although
the total long-term cost for reach compliance is unknown at this time, we spent approximately $5 million, $9 million and $3 million in 2011,
2010 and 2009, respectively, to meet the initial reach requirements. we cannot provide assurance that these recent expenditures are indicative of future amounts that we may be required to spend for
reach compliance. 

greenhouse gas regulation  

although the existence of binding emissions limitations under international treaties such as the kyoto protocol is in doubt after 2012,
we expect some or all of our operations to be subject to regulatory requirements to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases ("ghg"). even in the absence of a new global agreement to limit ghgs, we may be
subject to additional regulation under the european union emissions trading system as well as new national and regional ghg trading programs. for example, our operations in australia and selected u.s.
states may be subject to future ghg regulations under emissions trading systems in those jurisdictions. 

because
the united states has not adopted federal climate change legislation, domestic ghg efforts are likely to be guided by epa regulations in the near future. while epa's ghg programs
are currently subject to judicial challenge, our domestic operations may become subject to epa's regulatory requirements when implemented. in particular, expansions of our existing facilities or
construction of new facilities may be subject to the clean air act's prevention of significant deterioration requirements under epa's ghg "tailoring rule." in addition, certain aspects of our
operations may be subject to ghg emissions monitoring and reporting requirements. if we are subject to epa ghg regulations, we may face increased monitoring, reporting, and compliance costs. 

we
are already managing and reporting ghg emissions, to varying degrees, as required by law for our sites in locations subject to kyoto protocol obligations and/or eu emissions trading
scheme 

30




 

table of contents

requirements.
although these sites are subject to existing ghg legislation, few have experienced or anticipate significant cost increases as a result of these programs, although it is possible that
ghg emission restrictions may increase over time. potential consequences of such restrictions include capital requirements to modify assets to meet ghg emission restrictions and/or increases in energy
costs above the level of general inflation, as well as direct compliance costs. currently, however, it is not possible to estimate the likely financial impact of potential future regulation on any of
our sites. 

finally,
it should be noted that some scientists have concluded that increasing concentrations of ghg in the earth's atmosphere may produce climate changes that have significant physical
effects, such as increased frequency and severity of storms, droughts, and floods and other climatic events. if any of those effects were to occur, they could have an adverse effect on our assets and
operations. 

mtbe developments  

we produce mtbe, an oxygenate that is blended with gasoline to reduce vehicle air emissions and to enhance the octane rating of
gasoline. litigation or legislative initiatives restricting the use of mtbe in gasoline may subject us or our products to environmental liability or materially adversely affect our sales and costs.
because mtbe has contaminated some water supplies, its use has become controversial in the u.s. and elsewhere, and its use has been effectively eliminated in the u.s. market. we currently market mtbe,
either directly or through third parties, to gasoline additive customers located outside the u.s., although there are additional costs associated with such outside-u.s. sales which may
result in decreased profitability compared to historical sales in the u.s. we may also elect to use all or a portion of our precursor tba to produce saleable products other than mtbe. if we opt to
produce products other than mtbe, necessary modifications to our facilities will require significant capital expenditures and the sale of such other products may produce a lower level of cash flow
than that historically produced from the sale of mtbe. 

numerous
companies, including refiners, manufacturers and sellers of gasoline, as well as manufacturers of mtbe, have been named as defendants in numerous cases in u.s. courts that
allege mtbe contamination in groundwater. the plaintiffs in the mtbe groundwater contamination cases generally seek compensatory damages, punitive damages, injunctive relief, such as monitoring and
abatement, and attorney fees. between 2007 and 2009, we were named as a defendant in 18 of these lawsuits in new york state and federal courts, which we settled in an amount immaterial to us. 


it
is possible that we could be named as a defendant in existing or future mtbe contamination cases. we cannot provide assurances that adverse results against us in existing or future
mtbe contamination cases will not have a material effect on our financial statements. 

india investigation  

during the third quarter of 2010, we completed an internal investigation of the operations of petro araldite pvt. ltd.
("papl"), our majority owned joint venture in india. papl manufactures base liquid resins, base solid resins and formulated products in india. the investigation initially focused on
allegations of illegal disposal of hazardous waste and waste water discharge and
related reporting irregularities. based upon preliminary findings, the investigation was expanded to include a review of the production and off-book sales of certain products and waste
products. the investigation included the legality under indian law and u.s. law, including the u.s. foreign corrupt practices act, of certain payments made by employees of the joint venture to
government officials in india. records at the facility covering nine months in 2009 and early 2010 show that less than $11,000 in payments were made to officials for that period; in addition, payments
in unknown amounts may have been made by individuals from the facility in previous years. 

in
may and july 2010, papl fully disclosed the environmental noncompliance issues to the local indian environmental agency, the tamil nadu pollution control board ("tnpcb"). all
environmental compliance and reporting issues have been addressed to the agency's satisfaction other than the use of 

31




 

table of contents

freshwater
for the dilution of wastewater effluent discharges and including the remediation of several off-site solid waste disposal areas. both remaining issues are being addressed. at
tnpcb's direction, we submitted a plan for the remediation of the off-site waste disposal areas, which the tnpcb approved. the impacted off-site soil was excavated and
relocated to the site. final commercial disposal methods for the removed waste await approval from tnpcb, although we do not anticipate the costs to be material. 

also
in may 2010, we voluntarily contacted the u.s. securities and exchange commission (the "sec") and the doj to advise them of our investigation and that we intend to cooperate fully
with each of them. we met with the sec and the doj in october 2010 to discuss this matter and we continue to cooperate with these agencies. steps have been taken to halt all known illegal or improper
activity, including the termination of employment of management employees as appropriate. 


no
conclusions can be drawn at this time as to whether any government agencies will open formal investigations of these matters or what remedies such agencies may seek. governmental
agencies could assess material civil and criminal penalties and fines against papl and potentially against us and could issue orders that adversely affect the operations of papl. we cannot, however,
determine at this time the magnitude of the penalties and fines that could be assessed, the total costs to remediate the prior noncompliance or the effects of implementing any necessary corrective
measures on papl's operations. 

available information  

we maintain an internet website at http://www.huntsman.com. our annual reports on form 10-k, quarterly reports on
form 10-q, current reports on form 8-k and amendments to these reports are available free of charge through our website as soon as reasonably practicable after we
file this material with the sec. we also provide electronic or paper copies of our sec filings free of charge upon request. 


glossary of chemical terms  

deg—di-ethylene
glycol
bdo—butane diol
dga® agent—diglycolamine® agent
eg—ethylene glycol
eo—ethylene oxide
lab—linear alkyl benzene
las—linear alkylbenzene sulfonate
ler—liquid epoxy resins
lng—liquefied natural gas
meg—mono-ethylene glycol
mdi—methyl diphenyl diisocyanate
mtbe—methyl tertiary-butyl ether
pg—propylene glycol
po—propylene oxide
polyols—a substance containing several hydroxyl groups. a diol, triol and tetrol contain two, three and four hydroxyl groups respectively
tba—tertiary butyl alcohol
tbhp—tert-butyl hydroperoxide
tdi—toluene diisocyanate
teg—tri-ethylene glycol
tio2—titanium dioxide pigment
tpu—thermoplastic polyurethane
upr—unsaturated polyester resin 

32






 









































table of contents 

 
item 1a.    risk factors        


any of the following risks could materially and adversely affect our business, results of operations, financial condition and liquidity.

risks related to our business  

our industry is affected by global economic factors including risks associated with volatile economic conditions.  

our financial results are substantially dependent on overall economic conditions in the u.s., europe and asia. declining economic
conditions in all or any of these locations—or negative perceptions about economic conditions—could result in a substantial decrease in demand for our products and could
adversely affect our business. in particular, our operations in europe continue to be impacted by the uncertain european economy. while we currently anticipate that, in the aggregate, our business in
europe will grow slowly, a currency or financial crisis in europe could precipitate a significant decline in the european economy, which would likely result in a decrease in demand for our products in
europe. 

uncertain
economic conditions and market instability make it particularly difficult for us to forecast demand trends. the timing and extent of any changes to currently prevailing market
conditions is uncertain, and supply and demand may be unbalanced at any time. as a consequence, we may not be able to accurately predict future economic conditions or the effect of such conditions on
our financial condition or results of operations. we can give no assurances as to the timing, extent or duration of the current or future economic cycles impacting the chemical industry. 

significant price volatility or interruptions in supply of our raw materials may result in increased costs that we may be unable to pass on to our customers, which could
reduce our profitability.  

the prices of the raw materials that we purchase from third parties are cyclical and volatile. we purchase a substantial portion of our
raw materials from third-party suppliers. the cost of these raw materials represents a substantial portion of our operating expenses. the prices for a number of these raw materials generally follow
price trends of, and vary with market conditions for, crude oil and natural gas feedstocks, which are highly volatile and cyclical. 

in
general, the feedstocks and other raw materials we consume are organic commodity products that are readily available at market prices. however, ore feedstocks for our pigments segment
are periodically in short supply. we frequently enter into supply agreements with particular suppliers, but disruptions of existing supply arrangements or expiration of favorable supply contracts
could substantially impact our profitability. if certain of our suppliers are unable to meet their obligations under present supply agreements, we may be forced to pay higher prices to obtain the
necessary raw materials from other sources and we may not be able to increase prices for our finished products to recoup the higher raw materials costs. in addition, if raw materials become
unavailable within a geographic area from which they are now sourced, we may not be able to obtain suitable or cost effective substitutes. any interruption in the supply of raw materials could
increase our costs or decrease our revenues, which could reduce our cash flow. 

our
supply agreements typically provide for market-based pricing and provide us only limited protection against price volatility. while we attempt to match cost increases with
corresponding product price increases, we are not always able to raise product prices immediately or at all. timing differences between raw material prices, which may change daily, and contract
product prices, which in many cases are negotiated only monthly or less often, have had and may continue to have a negative effect on our cash flow. any cost increase that we are not able to pass on
to our customers could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, financial condition and liquidity. 

33




 

table of contents

the markets for many of our products are cyclical and volatile, and we may experience depressed market conditions for such products.  


historically, the markets for many of our products have experienced alternating periods of tight supply, causing prices and profit
margins to increase, followed by periods of capacity additions, resulting in oversupply and declining prices and profit margins. the volatility these markets experience occurs as a result of changes
in the supply and demand for products, changes in energy prices and changes in various other economic conditions around the world. this cyclicality and volatility of our industry results in
significant fluctuations in profits and cash flow from period to period and over the business cycle. 

our results of operations may be adversely affected by international business risks, including fluctuations in currency exchange rates, legal restrictions and taxes.  


we conduct a majority of our business operations outside the u.s., and these operations are subject to risks normally associated with
international operations. these risks include the need to convert currencies that may be received for our products into currencies in which we purchase raw materials or pay for services, which could
result in a gain or loss depending on fluctuations in exchange rates. in addition, we translate our local currency financial results into u.s. dollars based on average exchange rates prevailing during
the reporting period or the exchange rate at the end of that period. during times of a strengthening u.s. dollar, our reported international sales and earnings may be reduced because the local
currency may translate into fewer u.s. dollars. because we currently have significant operations located outside the u.s., we are exposed to fluctuations in global currency rates which may result in
gains or losses on our financial statements. 

other
risks of international operations include trade barriers, tariffs, exchange controls, national and regional labor strikes, social and political risks, general economic risks and
required compliance with a variety of u.s. and foreign laws, including tax laws and the foreign corrupt practices act. in addition, although we maintain an anti-corruption compliance
program throughout our company, violations of our compliance program may result in criminal or civil sanctions, including material monetary fines, penalties and other costs against us or our
employees, and may have a material adverse effect on our business. furthermore, in foreign jurisdictions where process of law may vary from country to country, we may experience difficulty in
enforcing agreements. in jurisdictions where bankruptcy laws and practices may vary, we may experience difficulty collecting foreign receivables through foreign legal systems. the occurrence of these
risks, among others, could disrupt the businesses of our international subsidiaries, which could significantly affect their ability to make distributions to us. 

we
operate in a significant number of jurisdictions, which contributes to the volatility of our effective tax rate. changes in tax laws or the interpretation of tax laws in the
jurisdictions in which we operate may affect our effective tax rate. in addition, generally accepted accounting principles in the u.s. ("gaap" or "u.s. gaap") has required us to place valuation
allowances against our net operating losses and other deferred tax assets in a number of tax jurisdictions. these valuation allowances primarily result from analysis of positive and negative evidence
supporting the realization of tax benefits. negative evidence includes a cumulative history of pre-tax operating losses in those specific tax jurisdictions. changes in valuation allowances
have resulted in material fluctuations in our effective tax rate. economic conditions may dictate the continued imposition of the current valuation allowances and potentially the establishment of new
valuation allowances. while significant valuation allowances remain, our effective tax rate will likely continue to experience significant fluctuations. 

34




 

table of contents

our efforts to grow our businesses may require significant investments; if our growth strategies are unsuccessful, our business, results of operations and/or financial
condition may be materially adversely affected.  

we continuously evaluate growth opportunities. our growth initiatives may involve making acquisitions, entering into partnerships and
joint ventures, and building new facilities—any of which could require a significant investment. we have incurred indebtedness to finance growth initiatives, and we may incur additional
indebtedness to finance future growth initiatives. we could also issue additional shares of stock to finance such initiatives. if our growth strategies are not successful, we could face increased
financial pressure, such as increased cash flow demands, reduced liquidity and diminished access to financial markets. 

in
addition, the implementation of growth strategies may create additional risks, including:



•diversion of management focus away from existing operations; 
•impairment of the operation of our business due to capital or equity commitments;  
•inability to accurately predict the costs and benefits of acquisitions, partnerships, joint ventures or new facilities;  
•inability to efficiently operate new businesses or to integrate acquired businesses;  
•disruptions to important business relationships; 
•increased operating costs; 
•difficulties in realizing projected synergies; 
•exposure to unanticipated liabilities, including for illegal activities conducted by an acquired company or a joint
venture partner; and 
•usage of limited investment and other baskets under our debt covenants. 


all
of these risks could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition. 

financial difficulties and related problems at our customers, vendors, suppliers and other business partners could have a material adverse effect on our business.  

during periods of economic disruption, more of our customers than normal may experience financial difficulties, including bankruptcies,
restructurings and liquidations, which could affect our business by reducing sales, increasing our risk in extending trade credit to customers and reducing our profitability. a significant adverse
change in a customer relationship or in a customer's financial position could cause us to limit or discontinue business with that customer, require us to assume more credit risk relating to that
customer's receivables or limit our ability to collect accounts receivable from that customer. in addition, we rely on a number of vendors and suppliers and collaborations with other industry
participants to provide us with chemicals, feedstocks and other raw materials, along with energy sources and, in certain cases, facilities, that we need to operate our business. during periods of
economic disruption, some of these companies could be forced to reduce their output, shut down their operations or file for bankruptcy protection. if this were to occur, it could adversely affect
their ability to provide us with the raw materials, energy sources or facilities that we need, which could materially disrupt our operations, including the production of certain of our products.
moreover, it could be difficult to find replacements for certain of our business partners without incurring significant delays or cost increases. all of these risks could have a material adverse
effect on our business, results of operations, financial condition and liquidity. 

35




 

table of contents

the industries in which we compete are highly competitive, and we may not be able to compete effectively with our competitors that have greater financial resources, which
could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition.  

the industries in which we operate are highly competitive. among our competitors are some of the world's largest chemical companies and
major integrated petroleum companies that have their own raw material resources. changes in the competitive landscape could make it difficult for us to retain our leadership position in various
products and markets throughout the
world. in addition, some of the companies with whom we compete may be able to produce products more economically than we can. furthermore, some of our competitors have greater financial resources,
which may enable them to invest significant capital into their businesses, including expenditures for research and development. some of our competitors are owned or partially owned by foreign
governments which may provide a competitive advantage to those competitors. while we are engaged in a range of research and development programs to develop new products and processes, to improve and
refine existing products and processes, and to develop new applications for existing products, the failure to develop new products, processes or applications could make us less competitive. moreover,
if any of our current or future competitors develops proprietary technology that enables them to produce products at a significantly lower cost, our technology could be rendered uneconomical or
obsolete. 

in
addition, certain of our businesses use technology that is widely available. accordingly, barriers to entry, apart from capital availability, may be low in certain product segments of
our business, and the entrance of new competitors into the industry may reduce our ability to capture improving profit margins in circumstances where capacity utilization in the industry is
increasing. further, petroleum-rich countries have become more significant participants in the petrochemical industry and may expand this role significantly in the future. increased
competition in any of our businesses could compel us to reduce the prices of our products, which could result in reduced profit margins and loss of market share and have a material adverse effect on
our business, results of operations, financial condition and liquidity. 

our significant debt level makes us vulnerable to downturns and may limit our ability to respond to market conditions or to obtain additional financing.  

we have significant outstanding debt: as of december 31, 2011, our total consolidated outstanding debt was approximately
$3,942 million (including current portion of debt); our debt to total capitalization ratio was approximately 69%; our combined outstanding variable rate borrowings were approximately
$2.4 billion; and our current portion of debt totaled approximately $212 million. our debt level, and the fact that a significant percentage of our cash flow is required to make payments
on our debt, could have important consequences for our business, including but not limited to the following:



•we may be more vulnerable to business, industry or economic downturns, making it more difficult to respond to market
conditions; 
•cash flow available for other purposes, including the growth of our business, may be reduced;  
•our ability to obtain additional financing may be constrained, particularly during periods when the capital markets are
unsettled; 
•our competitors with lower debt levels may have a competitive advantage relative to us; and  
•part of our debt is subject to variable interest rates, which makes us more vulnerable to increases in interest rates (for
example, a 1% increase in interest rates, without giving effect to interest rate hedges or other offsetting items, would increase our annual interest rate expense by approximately $24 million). 

36




 

table of contents

our
debt level also impacts our credit ratings. any decision by credit rating agencies to downgrade our debt ratings could restrict our ability to obtain additional financing and could
result in increased interest and other costs. 

agreements governing our debt may restrict our ability to engage in certain business activities or to obtain additional financing.  

the agreements governing our debt arrangements contain certain restrictive covenants. these covenants may limit or prohibit our ability
to incur more debt; make certain prepayments of debt; pay dividends, redeem stock or make other distributions; issue stock; make investments; create liens; enter into transactions with affiliates;
enter into sale and leaseback transactions; merge or consolidate; and transfer or sell assets. 


our
failure to comply with any of our debt covenants, or our failure to make payments of principal or interest on our debt, could result in a default, or trigger cross-default or
acceleration provisions, under our debt agreements. an event of default could result in our debt obligations becoming immediately due and payable, cause our creditors to terminate their lending
commitments, or force us or one or more of our subsidiaries into bankruptcy or liquidation. any of the foregoing occurrences could have a
material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition. for more information regarding our debt covenants, see "part ii. item 7. management's discussion
and analysis of financial condition and results of operations—liquidity and capital resources—compliance with covenants." 

natural or other disasters could disrupt our business and result in loss of revenue or in higher expenses.  

any serious disruption at any of our facilities due to hurricane, fire, earthquake, flood or any other natural or man-made
disaster could impair our ability to use our facilities and have a material impact on our revenues and increase our costs and expenses. if there is a natural disaster or other serious disruption at
any of these facilities, it could impair our ability to adequately supply our customers and negatively impact our operating results. in addition, many of our current and potential customers are
concentrated in specific geographic areas. a disaster in one of these regions could have a material impact on our operations, operating results and financial condition. 

while
we maintain business recovery plans that are intended to allow us to recover from natural disasters or other events that could disrupt our business, we cannot provide assurances
that our plans would fully protect us from all such disasters or events that might result due to climate change. in addition, insurance may not adequately compensate us from any losses incurred as a
result of natural or other disasters. furthermore, in areas prone to frequent natural or other disasters, insurance may become increasingly expensive or not available at all. 


our operations involve risks that may increase our operating costs, which could reduce our profitability.  

although we take precautions to enhance the safety of our operations and minimize the risk of disruptions, our operations are subject
to hazards inherent in the manufacturing and marketing of chemical products. these hazards include: chemical spills, pipeline leaks and ruptures, storage tank leaks, discharges or releases of toxic or
hazardous substances or gases and other hazards incident to the manufacturing, processing, handling, transportation and storage of dangerous chemicals. we are also potentially subject to other
hazards, including natural disasters and severe weather; explosions and fires; transportation problems, including interruptions, spills and leaks; mechanical failures; unscheduled downtimes; labor
difficulties; remediation complications; and other risks. many potential hazards can cause bodily injury and loss of life, severe damage to or destruction of property and equipment and environmental
damage, and may result in suspension of operations and the imposition of civil or criminal penalties and liabilities. furthermore, we are subject to present and future claims with respect 

37




 

table of contents

to
workplace exposure, exposure of contractors on our premises as well as other persons located nearby, workers' compensation and other matters. 


we
maintain property, business interruption, products liability and casualty insurance policies which we believe are in accordance with customary industry practices, as well as insurance
policies covering other types of risks, such as pollution legal liability insurance, but we are not fully insured against all potential hazards and risks incident to our business. each of these
insurance policies is subject to customary exclusions, deductibles and coverage limits, in accordance with industry standards and practices. as a result of market conditions, premiums and deductibles
for certain insurance policies can increase substantially and, in some instances, certain insurance may become unavailable or available only for reduced amounts of coverage. if we were to incur a
significant liability for which we were not fully insured, it could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, financial condition and liquidity. 

in
addition, we are subject to various claims and litigation in the ordinary course of business. we are a party to various pending lawsuits and proceedings. it is possible that judgments
could be rendered against us in these cases or others in which we could be uninsured or not covered by indemnity and beyond the amounts that we currently have reserved or anticipate incurring for such
matters. 

our operations, financial condition and liquidity could be adversely affected by legal claims against us, including antitrust claims.  


we face risks arising from various legal actions, including matters relating to antitrust, product liability, intellectual property and
environmental claims. over the past few years, antitrust claims have been made against chemical companies, and we have been named as a defendant in the antitrust suits discussed in "item 3.
legal proceedings—antitrust matters" below. in this type of litigation, the plaintiffs generally seek treble damages, which may be significant. an adverse outcome in any antitrust claim
could be material and significantly impact our operations, financial condition and liquidity. 

we are subject to many ehs regulations that may result in unanticipated costs or liabilities, which could reduce our profitability.  


we are subject to extensive federal, state, local and foreign laws, regulations, rules and ordinances relating to pollution, protection
of the environment and human
health, and the generation, storage, handling, transportation, treatment, disposal and remediation of hazardous substances and waste materials. actual or alleged violations of ehs laws or permit
requirements could result in restrictions or prohibitions on plant operations and substantial civil or criminal sanctions, as well as, under some ehs laws, the assessment of strict liability and/or
joint and several liability. 

increasing
concerns regarding the safety of chemicals in commerce and their potential impact on the environment constitute a growing trend. governmental, regulatory and societal demands
for increasing levels of product safety and environmental protection could result in increased pressure for more stringent regulatory control with respect to the chemical industry. in addition, these
concerns could influence public perceptions, the viability of certain products, our reputation, the cost to comply with regulations, and the ability to attract and retain employees. moreover, changes
in ehs regulations could inhibit or interrupt our operations, or require us to modify our facilities or operations. accordingly, environmental or regulatory matters may cause us to incur significant
unanticipated losses, costs or liabilities, which could reduce our profitability. 

we
could incur significant expenditures in order to comply with existing or future ehs laws. capital expenditures and costs relating to ehs matters will be subject to evolving regulatory
requirements and will depend on the timing of the promulgation and enforcement of specific standards which impose requirements on our operations. capital expenditures and costs beyond those currently
anticipated may therefore be required under existing or future ehs laws. 

38




 

table of contents

furthermore,
we may be liable for the costs of investigating and cleaning up environmental contamination on or from our properties or at off-site locations where we disposed
of or arranged for the disposal or treatment of hazardous materials or from disposal activities that pre-dated our purchase of our businesses. we may therefore incur additional costs and
expenditures beyond those currently anticipated to address all such known and unknown situations under existing and future ehs laws. 

we are subject to risks relating to our information technology systems, and any failure to adequately protect our critical information technology systems could materially
affect our operations.  

we rely on information technology systems across our operations, including for management, supply chain and financial information and
various other processes and transactions. our ability to effectively manage our business depends on the security, reliability and capacity of these systems. information technology system failures,
network disruptions or breaches of
security could disrupt our operations, causing delays or cancellation of customer orders or impeding the manufacture or shipment of products, processing of transactions or reporting of financial
results. an attack or other problem with our systems could also result in the disclosure of proprietary information about our business or confidential information concerning our customers or
employees, which could result in significant damage to our business and our reputation. 

we
have put in place security measures designed to protect against the misappropriation or corruption of our systems, intentional or unintentional disclosure of confidential information,
or disruption of our operations. current employees have, and former employees may have, access to a significant amount of information regarding our operations which could be disclosed to our
competitors or otherwise used to harm us. moreover, our operations in certain locations, such as china, may be particularly vulnerable to security attacks or other problems. any breach of our security
measures could result in unauthorized access to and misappropriation of our information, corruption of data or disruption of operations or transactions, any of which could have a material adverse
effect on our business. 

in
addition, we could be required to expend significant additional amounts to respond to information technology issues or to protect against threatened or actual security breaches. we
may not be able to implement measures that will protect against all of the significant risks to our information technology systems. 

our business is dependent on our intellectual property. if our intellectual property rights cannot be enforced or our trade secrets become known to our competitors, our
ability to compete may be adversely affected.  

proprietary protection of our processes, apparatuses and other technology is important to our business. while a presumption of validity
exists with respect to patents issued to us in the u.s., there can be no assurance that any of our patents will not be challenged, invalidated, circumvented or rendered unenforceable. furthermore, if
any pending patent application filed by us does not result in an issued patent, or if patents are issued to us, but such patents do not provide meaningful protection of our intellectual property, then
our ability to compete may be adversely affected. additionally, our competitors or other third parties may obtain patents that restrict or preclude our ability to lawfully produce or sell our products
in a competitive manner, which could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, financial condition and liquidity. 

we
also rely upon unpatented proprietary know-how and continuing technological innovation and other trade secrets to develop and maintain our competitive position. while it
is our policy to enter into confidentiality agreements with our employees and third parties to protect our intellectual property, these confidentiality agreements may be breached, may not provide
meaningful protection for our trade secrets or proprietary know-how, or adequate remedies may not be available in the event of an unauthorized access, use or disclosure of our trade
secrets and know-how. in addition, others could 

39




 

table of contents

obtain
knowledge of our trade secrets through independent development or other access by legal means. 


consequently,
we may have to rely on judicial enforcement of our patents and other proprietary rights. we may not be able to effectively protect our intellectual property rights from
misappropriation or infringement in countries where effective patent, trademark, trade secret and other intellectual property laws and judicial systems may be unavailable, or may not protect our
proprietary rights to the same extent as u.s. law. 

the
failure of our patents or confidentiality agreements to protect our processes, apparatuses, technology, trade secrets or proprietary know-how or the failure of adequate
legal remedies for related actions could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, financial condition and liquidity. 


our production of mtbe may subject us to liability, and regulatory or market changes with respect to mtbe may materially reduce our sales and/or materially increase our
costs.  

we produce mtbe, an oxygenate that is blended with gasoline to reduce vehicle air emissions and to enhance the octane rating of
gasoline. because mtbe has contaminated some water supplies, its use has become controversial in the u.s. and elsewhere, and its use has been effectively eliminated in the u.s. market. refiners,
manufacturers and sellers of gasoline, as well as manufacturers of mtbe, have been named as defendants in numerous cases in u.s. courts that allege mtbe contamination in groundwater. plaintiffs in the
mtbe groundwater contamination cases generally seek compensatory damages, punitive damages, injunctive relief (such as monitoring and abatement) and attorney fees. between 2007 and 2009, we were named
as a defendant in 18 of these lawsuits, which we settled in an amount immaterial to us. it is possible that we could be named as a defendant in future mtbe litigation and, if so, that adverse results
could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial position. 

we
currently market mtbe, either directly or through third parties, to gasoline additive customers located outside the u.s. such sales are less profitable compared to historical u.s.
sales because our shipping costs are higher. legislative or regulatory initiatives further restricting mtbe could materially adversely affect our sales and costs. 


while
we could use all or a portion of our precursor tba to produce saleable products other than mtbe, this would require significant capital expenditures to modify our facilities.
moreover, the sale of other products would produce a lower level of cash flow than that historically produced from the sale of mtbe. 

loss of key members of our management could disrupt our business.  

we depend on the continued employment and performance of our senior executives and other key members of management. if any of these
individuals resigns or becomes unable to continue in his or her present role and is not adequately replaced, our business operations and our ability to implement our growth strategies could be
materially disrupted. we generally do not have employment agreements with, and we do not maintain any "key person" life insurance for, any of our executive officers. 

conflicts, military actions, terrorist attacks and general instability, in particular in certain energy-producing nations, along with increased security regulations related
to our industry, could adversely affect our business.  

conflicts, military actions and terrorist attacks have precipitated economic instability and turmoil in financial markets. instability
and turmoil, particularly in energy-producing nations, may result in raw material cost increases. the uncertainty and economic disruption resulting from hostilities, military action or acts of
terrorism may impact any or all of our facilities and operations or those of our 

40




 

table of contents

suppliers
or customers. accordingly, any conflict, military action or terrorist attack that impacts us or any of our suppliers or customers, could have a material adverse effect on our business,
results of operations, financial condition and liquidity. 

in
addition, a number of governments have instituted regulations attempting to increase the security of chemical plants and the transportation of hazardous chemicals, which could result
in higher operating costs and could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and liquidity. 

if our subsidiaries do not make sufficient distributions to us, then we will not be able to make payment on our debts.  

our debt is generally the exclusive obligation of huntsman international and our guarantor subsidiaries. because a significant portion
of our operations are conducted by non-guarantor subsidiaries, our cash flow and our ability to service indebtedness, including our ability to pay the interest on our debt when due and
principal of such debt at maturity, are dependent to a large extent upon cash dividends and distributions or other transfers from such non-guarantor subsidiaries. any payment of dividends,
distributions, loans or advances by our non-guarantor subsidiaries to us could be subject to restrictions on dividends or repatriation of earnings under applicable local law, monetary
transfer restrictions and foreign currency exchange regulations in the jurisdictions in which our subsidiaries operate, and any restrictions imposed by the current and future debt instruments of our
non-guarantor subsidiaries. in addition, payments to us by our subsidiaries are contingent upon our subsidiaries' earnings. 


our
subsidiaries are separate legal entities and, except for our guarantor subsidiaries, have no obligation, contingent or otherwise, to pay any amounts due on our debt or to make any
funds available for those amounts, whether by dividends, loans, distributions or other payments, and do not guarantee the payment of interest on, or principal of, our debt. any right that we have to
receive any assets of any of our subsidiaries that are not guarantors upon the liquidation or reorganization of any such subsidiary, and the consequent right of holders of notes to realize proceeds
from the sale of their assets, will be structurally subordinated to the claims of that subsidiary's creditors, including trade creditors and holders of debt issued by that subsidiary. 


regulatory requirements to reduce ghg emissions could have an adverse effect on our results of operations.  

although the continued existence of binding emissions limitations under international treaties such as the kyoto protocol is in doubt
after 2012, we expect some of our operations to be subject to regulatory requirements to reduce ghg emissions. even in the absence of a new global agreement to limit ghgs, we may be subject to
additional regulation under the european union emissions trading system as well as new national and regional ghg trading programs. for example, our operations in australia and selected u.s. states may
be subject to future ghg regulations under emissions trading systems in those jurisdictions. 


because
the u.s. has not adopted federal climate change legislation, domestic ghg efforts are likely to be guided by epa and state agency regulations in the near future. while epa's ghg
programs are currently subject to judicial challenge, our domestic operations may become subject to epa's regulatory requirements when implemented. in particular, expansions of our existing facilities
or construction of new facilities may be subject to the clean air act's prevention of significant deterioration requirements under epa's ghg "tailoring rule." in addition, certain aspects of our
operations may
be subject to ghg emissions monitoring and reporting requirements. if we are subject to epa ghg regulations, we may face increased monitoring, reporting, and compliance costs. 

41






 



































 




table of contents 

we are already managing and reporting ghg emissions, to varying degrees, as required by law for our sites in locations subject to kyoto protocol obligations
and/or eu emissions trading scheme requirements. although these sites are subject to existing ghg legislation, few have experienced or anticipate significant cost increases as a result of these
programs, although it is possible that ghg emission restrictions may increase over time. potential consequences of such restrictions include capital costs to modify operations as necessary to meet ghg
emission limits and/or additional in energy costs, as well as direct compliance costs. currently, however, it is not possible to estimate the likely financial impact of potential future regulation on
any of our sites. 

finally,
it should be noted that some scientists have concluded that increasing concentrations of ghgs in the earth's atmosphere may produce climate changes that have significant
physical effects, such as increased frequency and severity of storms, droughts, floods and other climatic events. if any of those effects were to occur, they could have an adverse effect on our
facilities and operations. 

risks related to our common stock and debt securities  

our stock price has been and may continue to be subject to large fluctuations.  

we have experienced significant fluctuations in our stock price and share trading volume in the past and may continue to do so. the
trading price of our common stock has been and may continue to be subject to wide fluctuations in response to a variety of issues, including broad market factors that may have a material adverse
impact on our stock price, regardless of actual performance. the following factors could affect our stock price:



•periodic variations in the actual or anticipated financial results of our business or that of our competitors;  
•downward revisions in securities analysts' estimates of our future operating results or of the future operating results of
our competitors; 
•material announcements by us or our competitors; 
•public sales of a substantial number of shares of our common stock; and  
•adverse changes in general market conditions or economic trends or in conditions or trends in the markets in which we
operate. 


shares available for future sale may cause our common stock price to decline, which may negatively impact the trading price of our common stock.  


sales of substantial numbers of additional shares of our common stock, or the perception that such sales could occur, may cause
prevailing market prices for shares of our common stock to decline. 

we have the ability to issue additional equity securities, which would lead to further dilution of our issued and outstanding common stock.  

the issuance of additional equity securities would result in dilution of then-existing stockholders' equity interests in
our company. our certificate of incorporation authorizes our board of directors, without stockholder approval, to establish one or more series of preferred stock and to determine, with respect to any
series of preferred stock, the number of shares in that series and the terms, rights and limitations of that series. if we issue convertible notes or convertible preferred stock, a subsequent
conversion may dilute the current common stockholders' interest. our board of directors has no present intention of issuing any such convertible instruments, but reserves the right to do so in the
future. in addition, we may issue additional shares of common stock under our equity incentive plans. 

42




 

table of contents

certain provisions contained in our certificate of incorporation and bylaws could discourage a takeover attempt, which may reduce or eliminate the likelihood of a change of
control transaction and, therefore, limit your ability to sell our common stock at a price higher than the current market value.  

certain provisions contained in our certificate of incorporation and bylaws, such as a classified board of directors, limitations on
stockholder proposals at meetings of stockholders and the inability of stockholders to call special meetings and certain provisions of delaware law, could make it more difficult for a third party to
acquire control of our company, even if some of our stockholders considered such a change of control to be beneficial. our certificate of incorporation also authorizes our board of directors to issue
preferred stock without stockholder approval. therefore, our board of directors could elect to issue preferred stock that has special voting
or other rights that could make it even more difficult for a third party to acquire us, which may reduce or eliminate your ability to sell our common stock at a price higher than the current market
value. 

the declaration of dividends by our company is subject to the discretion of our board of directors and limitations under delaware law, and there can be no assurance that we
will continue to pay dividends.  

over the past four years we have paid quarterly dividends on our common stock. the declaration of dividends by our company is subject
to the discretion of our board of directors. our board of directors takes into account such matters as general business conditions, our financial results, expected liquidity and capital expenditure
requirements, contractual, legal or regulatory restrictions on the payment of dividends, the effect on our debt ratings and such other factors as our board of directors may deem relevant, and we can
provide no assurance that we will continue to pay dividends on our common stock. in addition, delaware law contains certain restrictions on a company's ability to pay cash dividends and we can provide
no assurance that those restrictions will not prevent us from paying a dividend in future periods. 

jon m. huntsman, through direct and indirect ownership of our common stock, may be deemed to control approximately 17% of our outstanding common stock, and he may have the
ability to substantially impact the outcome of matters voted on by our stockholders.  

jon m. huntsman, through direct and indirect ownership of our common stock, may be deemed to control approximately 17% of our
outstanding common stock. through his interests, he may have the ability to substantially impact:



•the election of the members of the board of directors of our company; 
•the outcome of matters submitted to our stockholders for approval, including amendments to our certificate of
incorporation, mergers, consolidations and the sale of all or substantially all of our assets; and 
•any potential change in control of our company. 


we may purchase a portion of our debt securities, which could impact the market for our debt securities and likely would negatively affect our liquidity.  

during 2011, we have redeemed certain of our debt securities, including $305 million of our senior subordinated notes. we may
from time to time seek to repurchase or redeem more of our debt securities in open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions, tender offers, partial or full call for redemption or otherwise.
any such repurchases or redemptions and the timing and amount thereof would depend on prevailing market conditions, liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors. such
transactions could negatively affect our liquidity. 

43




 

table of contents



 
item 1b.    unresolved staff comments        

as of the date of this filing, we did not have any unresolved comments from the staff of the sec.  


 
item 2.    properties        

we own or lease chemical manufacturing and research facilities in the locations indicated in the list below which we believe are
adequate for our short-term and anticipated long-term needs. we own or lease office space and storage facilities throughout the u.s. and in many foreign countries. our
principal executive offices are located at 500 huntsman way, salt lake city, utah 84108. the following is a list of our material owned or leased properties where manufacturing, research and main
office facilities are located. 
 















location



 
 
business segment 
 
description of facility 


salt lake city, utah(1)
 
corporate and other
 
executive offices


the woodlands, texas(1)
 
various
 
operating headquarters, global technology center


geismar, louisiana(2)
 
polyurethanes and performance products
 
mdi, nitrobenzene(4), aniline(4), polyols and maleic anhydride manufacturing facilities and polyurethanes systems house


rozenburg, the netherlands(1)
 
polyurethanes
 
mdi manufacturing facility, polyols manufacturing facilities and polyurethanes systems house


caojing, china
 
polyurethanes
 
mdi finishing facilities, global technology center


caojing, china(3)
 
polyurethanes
 
precursor mdi manufacturing facility


deer park, australia
 
polyurethanes
 
polyurethane systems house


cartagena, colombia
 
polyurethanes
 
polyurethane systems house


deggendorf, germany
 
polyurethanes
 
polyurethane systems house


ternate, italy
 
polyurethanes
 
polyurethane systems house


shanghai, china(1)
 
polyurethanes
 
polyurethane systems house, global technology center


thane (maharashtra), india(1)
 
polyurethanes
 
polyurethane systems house


buenos aires, argentina(1)
 
polyurethanes
 
polyurethane systems house


samutprakarn, thailand(1)
 
polyurethanes
 
polyurethane systems house


istanbul, turkey
 
polyurethanes
 
polyurethane systems house


kuan yin, taiwan(1)
 
polyurethanes
 
polyurethane systems house


tlalnepantla, mexico
 
polyurethanes
 
polyurethane systems house


mississauga, ontario(1)
 
polyurethanes
 
polyurethane systems house


obninsk, russia(4)
 
polyurethanes
 
polyurethane systems house


dammam, saudi arabia(5)
 
polyurethanes
 
polyurethane systems house


auburn hills, michigan(1)
 
polyurethanes
 
polyurethane research facility


everberg, belgium
 
polyurethanes and performance products
 
polyurethane and performance products regional headquarters, global technology center


derry, new hampshire(1)
 
polyurethanes
 
tpu research facility


ringwood, illinois(1)
 
polyurethanes
 
tpu manufacturing facility


osnabrück, germany
 
polyurethanes
 
tpu manufacturing facility and polyurethane systems house


wilton, u.k. 
 
polyurethanes
 
aniline and nitrobenzene manufacturing facilities


port neches, texas
 
polyurethanes and performance products
 
olefins, eo, eg, surfactants, amines and po manufacturing facilities


conroe, texas
 
performance products
 
amines manufacturing facility


petfurdo, hungary(1)
 
performance products
 
amines manufacturing facility


llanelli, u.k. 
 
performance products
 
amines manufacturing facility


freeport, texas(1)
 
performance products
 
amines manufacturing facility


jurong island, singapore(1)
 
performance products
 
amines manufacturing facility



 
44




 

table of contents
 















location



 
 
business segment 
 
description of facility 


jubail, saudi arabia(6)
 
performance products
 
amines manufacturing facility


chocolate bayou, texas(1)
 
performance products
 
lab manufacturing facility


pensacola, florida(1)
 
performance products
 
maleic anhydride manufacturing facility


moers, germany(7)
 
performance products
 
maleic anhydride manufacturing facility


dayton, texas
 
performance products
 
surfactant manufacturing facility


botany, australia
 
performance products
 
surfactant/eg manufacturing facility


st. mihiel, france
 
performance products
 
surfactant manufacturing facility


lavera, france(1)
 
performance products
 
surfactant manufacturing facility


castiglione, italy
 
performance products
 
surfactant manufacturing facility


ankleshwar, india(1)
 
performance products
 
surfactant /amines manufacturing facility


patrica/frosinone, italy
 
performance products
 
surfactant manufacturing facility


barcelona, spain(1)
 
performance products
 
surfactant manufacturing facility


melbourne, australia
 
performance products
 
research facility


bergkamen, germany
 
advanced materials
 
synthesis facility


monthey, switzerland
 
advanced materials
 
resins and synthesis facility


pamplona, spain
 
advanced materials
 
resins and synthesis facility


mcintosh, alabama
 
advanced materials
 
resins and synthesis facility


chennai, india(8)
 
advanced materials
 
resins and synthesis facility


bad saeckingen, germany(1)
 
advanced materials
 
formulating facility


duxford, u.k. 
 
advanced materials
 
formulating facility


sadat city, egypt
 
advanced materials
 
formulating facility


taboão da serra, brazil
 
advanced materials and polyurethanes
 
formulating facility and polyurethane systems house


panyu, china(1)(9)
 
advanced materials
 
formulating and synthesis facility and technology center


east lansing, michigan
 
advanced materials
 
formulating facility


istanbul, turkey(1)
 
advanced materials
 
formulating facility


los angeles, california
 
advanced materials
 
formulating facility


basel, switzerland(1)
 
advanced materials and textile effects
 
technology center, advanced materials headquarters and textile effects textile dyes facility


panyu, china(1)(9)
 
textile effects
 
chemicals synthesis facility and technology center


langweid am leich, germany(1)
 
textile effects
 
chemicals synthesis facility


charlotte, north carolina(1)
 
textile effects
 
chemicals formulations facility


samutsakorn (mahachai), thailand(1)
 
textile effects
 
textiles dyes and chemicals formulations facility


atotonilquillo, mexico
 
textile effects
 
textile dyes and chemicals formulations facility


high point, north carolina(1)
 
textile effects
 
technology center


baroda, india
 
textile effects
 
textile dyes and chemicals synthesis facility


gandaria, indonesia
 
textile effects
 
textile dyes and chemicals formulations facility


qingdao, china
 
textile effects
 
textile dyes facility


fraijanes, guatemala(1)
 
textile effects
 
chemicals formulations facility


bogota, colombia(1)
 
textile effects
 
chemicals formulations facility


hangzhou, china(1)
 
textile effects
 
chemicals formulations facility


istanbul, turkey(1)
 
textile effects
 
chemicals formulations facility


karachi, pakistan(1)
 
textile effects
 
chemicals formulations facility


gateway, singapore(1)
 
textile effects and performance products
 
textile effects headquarters and performance products regional headquarters


greatham, u.k. 
 
pigments
 
titanium dioxide manufacturing facility


calais, france
 
pigments
 
titanium dioxide manufacturing facility


huelva, spain
 
pigments
 
titanium dioxide manufacturing facility


scarlino, italy
 
pigments
 
titanium dioxide manufacturing facility


teluk kalung, malaysia
 
pigments
 
titanium dioxide manufacturing facility


umbogintwini, south africa
 
pigments
 
titanium dioxide manufacturing facility



 
45




 

table of contents
 















location



 
 
business segment 
 
description of facility 


lake charles, louisiana(10)
 
pigments
 
titanium dioxide manufacturing facility







 

 
(1)leased
land and/or building.
(2)the
geismar facility is owned as follows: we own 100% of the mdi, polyol and maleic anhydride facilities, and rubicon llc, a consolidated
manufacturing joint venture with chemtura corporation in which we own a 50% interest, owns the aniline and nitrobenzene facilities. rubicon llc is a separate legal entity that operates both the
assets that we own jointly with chemtura corporation and our wholly-owned assets at geismar.
(3)35%
interest in slic, our unconsolidated manufacturing joint venture with basf ag and three chinese chemical companies.
(4)45%-owned
unconsolidated manufacturing joint venture with nmg. during 2011, we gave notice of exercise of our option to acquire the remaining 55% interest
in this joint venture. however, the selling shareholder is disputing the continued validity of the option, and we are seeking to resolve the dispute.
(5)51%-owned
consolidated manufacturing joint venture with basic chemicals industries ltd.
(6)50%
interest in arabian amines company, our consolidated manufacturing joint venture with zamil group.
(7)50%
interest in sasol-huntsman, our consolidated manufacturing joint venture with sasol.
(8)76%-owned
consolidated manufacturing joint venture with tamilnadu petroproducts limited.
(9)95%-owned
consolidated manufacturing joint venture with guangdong panyu shilou town economic development co. ltd.
(10)owned
by louisiana pigment company, l.p., our unconsolidated manufacturing joint venture which is owned 50% by us and 50% by kronos worldwide. 
 
  
item 3.   legal proceedings        

antitrust matters  

we were named as a defendant in civil class action antitrust suits alleging that between 1999 and 2004 we conspired with bayer, basf,
dow and lyondell to fix the prices of mdi, tdi, polyether polyols, and related systems ("polyether polyol products") sold in the u.s. in
violation of the federal sherman act. these cases are consolidated as the "polyether polyols" cases in multidistrict litigation pending in the u.s. district court for the district of kansas. 

in
addition, we and the other polyether polyol defendants were named as defendants in three civil antitrust suits brought by certain direct purchasers of polyether polyol products that
opted out of the class certified in the kansas multidistrict litigation. the relevant time frame for these cases is 1994 to 2004 and they are referred to as the "direct action cases." the class action
and the direct action cases were consolidated in the kansas court for the purposes of discovery and other pretrial matters. 


in
2011 we settled both the class action and the direct action cases, and we have been dismissed as a defendant in both of those cases. the class settlement obligates us to pay the class
an additional $11 million in each of 2012 and 2013. 

two
similar civil antitrust class action cases were filed may 5 and 17, 2006 in the superior court of justice, ontario canada and superior court, province of quebec, district of
quebec, on behalf of purported classes of canadian direct and indirect purchasers of mdi, tdi and polyether polyols. the class certification hearing is scheduled for april 2, 2012. 


a
purported class action case filed february 15, 2002 by purchasers in california of products containing rubber and urethane chemicals and pending in superior court of california,
county of san francisco is stayed pending resolution of the kansas multidistrict litigation. the plaintiffs in this matter make similar claims against the defendants as the class plaintiffs in the
kansas multidistrict litigation. 

46




 


table of contents

we
have been named as a defendant in two purported class action civil antitrust suits alleging that we and our co-defendants and other co-conspirators conspired
to fix prices of titanium dioxide sold in the u.s. between at least march 1, 2002 and the present. the cases were filed on february 9 and 12, 2010 in the u.s. district court for the
district of maryland and a consolidated complaint was filed on april 12, 2010. the other defendants named in this matter are e.i. du pont de nemours and company, kronos worldwide inc.,
millennium inorganic chemicals, inc. and the national titanium dioxide company limited (d/b/a cristal). a class certification hearing is scheduled for august 16, 2012 and trial is set to
begin september 9, 2013. discovery is ongoing. 

in
all of the antitrust litigation currently pending against us, the plaintiffs generally are seeking injunctive relief, treble damages, costs of suit and attorneys fees. we are not
aware of any illegal conduct by us or any of our employees. nevertheless, we have incurred costs relating to these claims and could incur additional costs in amounts material to us. 

asbestos litigation  

we have been named as a "premises defendant" in a number of asbestos exposure cases, typically claims by nonemployees of exposure to
asbestos while at a facility. in the past, these cases typically have involved multiple plaintiffs bringing actions against multiple defendants, and the complaints have not indicated which plaintiffs
were making claims against which defendants, where or how the alleged injuries occurred or what injuries each plaintiff claimed. these facts, which would be central to any estimate of probable loss,
generally have been learned only through discovery. 

where
a claimant's alleged exposure occurred prior to our ownership of the relevant "premises," the prior owners generally have contractually agreed to retain liability for, and to
indemnify us against, asbestos exposure claims. this indemnification is not subject to any time or dollar amount limitations. upon service of a complaint in one of these cases, we tender it to the
prior owner. rarely do the complaints in these cases state the amount of damages being sought. the prior owner accepts responsibility for the conduct of the defense of the cases and payment of any
amounts due to the claimants. in our eighteen-year experience with tendering these cases, we have not made any payment with respect to any tendered asbestos cases. we believe that the
prior owners have the intention and ability to continue to honor their indemnity obligations, although we cannot assure you that they will continue to do so or that we will not be liable for these
cases if they do not. 

the
following table presents for the periods indicated certain information about cases for which service has been received that we have tendered to the prior owner, all of which have
been accepted. 
 





















 
 
year ended
december 31,
2011 
 
year ended
december 31,
2010 
 
year ended
december 31,
2009 
 


unresolved at beginning of period
 
 
1,116
 
 
1,138
 
 
1,140
 


tendered during period
 
 
10
 
 
24
 
 
18
 


resolved during period(1)
 
 
46
 
 
46
 
 
20
 


unresolved at end of period
 
 
1,080
 
 
1,116
 
 
1,138
 







 

 
(1)although
the indemnifying party informs us when tendered cases have been resolved, it generally does not inform us of the settlement amounts relating to
such cases, if any. the indemnifying party has informed us that it typically manages our defense together with the defense of other entities in such cases and resolves claims involving multiple
defendants simultaneously, and that it considers the allocation of settlement amounts, if any, among defendants to be confidential and proprietary. consequently, we are not able to provide the number
of cases resolved with payment by the indemnifying party or the amount of such payments. 
 
47




 


table of contents

we
have never made any payments with respect to these cases. as of december 31, 2011, we had an accrued liability of $10 million relating to these cases and a corresponding
receivable of $10 million relating to our indemnity protection with respect to these cases. we cannot assure you that our liability will not exceed our accruals or that our liability associated
with these cases would not be material to our financial condition, results of operations or liquidity; accordingly, we are not able to estimate the amount or range of loss in excess of our accruals.
additional asbestos exposure claims may be made against us in the future, and such claims could be material. however, because we are not able to estimate the amount or range of losses associated with
such claims, we have made no accruals with respect to unasserted asbestos exposure claims as of december 31, 2011. 

certain
cases in which we are a premises defendant are not subject to indemnification by prior owners or operators. the following table presents for the periods indicated certain
information about these cases. cases include all cases for which service has been received by us. certain prior cases that were filed in error against us have been dismissed. 
 





















 
 
year ended
december 31,
2011 
 
year ended
december 31,
2010 
 
year ended
december 31,
2009 
 


unresolved at beginning of period
 
 
37
 
 
39
 
 
43
 


filed during period
 
 
11
 
 
5
 
 
3
 


resolved during period
 
 
12
 
 
7
 
 
7
 


unresolved at end of period
 
 
36
 
 
37
 
 
39
 



 
we
paid gross settlement costs for asbestos exposure cases that are not subject to indemnification of $584,000 and $201,000 during the years ended december 31, 2011 and 2010,
respectively. as of december 31, 2011, we had an accrual of $460,000 relating to these cases. we cannot assure you that our liability will not exceed our accruals or that our liability
associated with these cases would not be material to our financial condition, results of operations or liquidity; accordingly, we are not able to estimate the amount or range of loss in excess of our
accruals. additional asbestos exposure claims may be made against us in the future, and such claims could be material. however, because we are not able to estimate the amount or range of losses
associated with such claims, we have made no accruals with respect to unasserted asbestos exposure claims as of december 31, 2011. 

environmental enforcement proceedings  

on occasion, we receive notices of violation, enforcement or other complaints from regulatory agencies alleging
non-compliance with applicable ehs laws. based on currently available information and our past experience, we do not believe that the resolution of any pending or threatened environmental
enforcement proceedings will have a material impact on our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows. 

other proceedings  

we are a party to various other proceedings instituted by private plaintiffs, governmental authorities and others arising under
provisions of applicable laws, including various environmental, products liability and other laws. except as otherwise disclosed in this report, we do not believe that the outcome of any of these
matters will have a material effect on our financial condition, results of operations or liquidity. 

48






 



































 




table of contents 

 
item 4.    mine safety disclosures.        

not applicable.


executive officers of the registrant  

the following is information concerning our executive officers and significant employees as of the date of this report. 

jon m. huntsman, age 74, is the executive chairman of the board of directors of our company. prior to appointment as executive chairman
effective february 2009, mr. huntsman served as chairman of the board of directors of our company, a position he had held since our company was formed. mr. huntsman also serves on our
litigation committee. he has been chairman of the board of all huntsman companies since he founded his first plastics company in 1970. mr. huntsman served as chief executive officer of our
company and our affiliated companies from 1970 to 2000. mr. huntsman is a director or manager, as applicable, of huntsman international and certain of our other subsidiaries. in addition,
mr. huntsman serves or has served as chairman or as a member of numerous corporate, philanthropic and industry boards, including the american red cross, the wharton school, university of
pennsylvania, primary children's medical center foundation, the chemical manufacturers association and the american plastics council. mr. huntsman was selected in 1994 as the chemical
industry's top ceo. mr. huntsman formerly served as special assistant to the president of the united states and as vice chairman of the u.s. chamber of commerce. he is the chairman and founder
of the huntsman cancer institute. mr. huntsman is the father of our chief executive officer, peter r. huntsman, our division president, advanced materials, james h. huntsman, and
our director, jon m. huntsman, jr. 

peter r. huntsman, age 48, is president, chief executive officer and a director of our company. mr. huntsman also serves on our
litigation committee. prior to his appointment in july 2000 as chief executive officer, mr. huntsman had served as president and chief operating officer since 1994. in 1987, mr. huntsman
joined huntsman polypropylene corporation as vice president before serving as senior vice president and general manager. mr. huntsman has also served as president of olympus oil, as senior vice
president of huntsman chemical corporation and as a senior vice president of huntsman packaging corporation, a former subsidiary of our company. mr. huntsman is a director or manager, as
applicable, of huntsman international and certain of our other subsidiaries. mr. huntsman is the son of our executive chairman, jon m. huntsman, and the brother of our division
president, advanced materials, james h. huntsman, and our director, jon m. huntsman, jr. 

j. kimo esplin, age 49, is executive vice president and chief financial officer. mr. esplin has served as chief financial officer
of all of the huntsman companies since 1999. from 1994 to 1999, mr. esplin served as our treasurer. prior to joining huntsman in 1994, mr. esplin was a vice president in the investment
banking division of bankers trust company, where he worked for seven years. mr. esplin also serves as a director of nutraceutical international corporation, a publicly traded nutrition
supplements company. 

james r. moore, age 67, is executive vice president, general counsel and secretary. prior to his appointment to this position in january
2010, mr. moore served as our vice president and deputy general counsel since 2003. prior to that, mr. moore served as vice president and chief environmental counsel from 2002 to 2003
and senior environmental counsel from 1998 to 2002. from 1989 until joining our company in 1998, mr. moore was a partner at the seattle law firm of perkins coie. mr. moore also
previously served as a trial attorney with the u.s. department of justice, an assistant u.s. attorney and regional counsel, region 10, of the u.s. environmental protection agency. 

49




 

table of contents

anthony p. hankins, age 54, is division president, polyurethanes and chief executive officer, asia-pacific. mr. hankins
was appointed to these positions in march 2004 and february 2011, respectively. from may 2003 to february 2004, mr. hankins served as president, performance products, from january 2002 to april
2003, he served as global vice president, rigids division for our polyurethanes business, from october 2000 to december 2001, he served as vice president—americas for our polyurethanes
business, and from march 1998 to september 2000, he served as vice president—asia-pacific for our polyurethanes business. mr. hankins worked for ici from 1980 to
february 1998, when he joined our company. at ici, mr. hankins held numerous management positions in the plastics, fibers and polyurethanes businesses. he has extensive international
experience, having held senior management positions in europe, asia and the u.s. 


paul g. hulme, age 55, is division president, textile effects. mr. hulme was appointed to this position in february 2009. from june
2003 to february 2009, mr. hulme served as division president, materials and effects. from february 2000 to may 2003, mr. hulme served as vice president, performance chemicals, and from
december 1999 to february 2000 he served as operations director, polyurethanes. prior to joining huntsman in 1999, mr. hulme held various positions with ici in finance, accounting and
information systems roles. mr. hulme is a chartered accountant. 

james h. huntsman, age 41, is division president, advanced materials. mr. huntsman was appointed to this position in july 2011.
prior to that time, mr. huntsman served as vice president of huntsman advanced materials, americas region since february 2009. from march 2006 to february 2009, mr. huntsman owned and
managed a film production company based in los angeles, california. prior to march 2006, he served as the company's vice president, u.s. base chemicals and polymers. mr. huntsman originally
joined the company in 1990 and has held numerous manufacturing and commercial roles of increasing responsibility within a number of divisions. mr. huntsman is the son of our executive chairman,
jon m. huntsman, the brother of our chief executive officer, peter r. huntsman, and the brother of our director, jon m. huntsman, jr. 

stewart a. monteith, age 55, is division president, performance products. mr. monteith was appointed to this position in february
2011. prior to that time, mr. monteith served as vice president of the performance specialties unit, a position he held since august 2003. he also served as vice president for global markets
and business development. mr. monteith joined huntsman in 1994. prior to joining huntsman, mr. monteith held various positions with texaco chemical company and union carbide. 

simon turner, age 48, is division president, pigments. prior to his appointment to this position in november 2008, mr. turner
served as senior vice president, pigments since april 2008. from september 2004 to april 2008, mr. turner served as vice president of global sales and from july 1999
to september 2004, he held positions including general manager co-products and director supply chain and shared services. prior to joining huntsman in july 1999, mr. turner held
various positions with ici. 

ronald w. gerrard, age 52, is senior vice president, environmental, health & safety and manufacturing excellence.
mr. gerrard was appointed to this position in june 2009. prior to this appointment, mr. gerrard served as vice president, global operations and technology in our polyurethanes business
from may 2004 to june 2009. from 1999 to may 2004, mr. gerrard served as vice president, asia; business director, flexible foams; and director, ehs and engineering, also within our
polyurethanes business. prior to joining huntsman in 1999, mr. gerrard had worked for ici and for evc, a joint venture between ici and enichem. mr. gerrard is a chartered engineer. 

brian v. ridd, age 54, is senior vice president, purchasing. mr. ridd has held this position since july 2000. mr. ridd
served as vice president, purchasing from december 1995 until he was appointed to his current position. mr. ridd joined huntsman in 1984. 

50




 

table of contents

r. wade rogers, age 46, is senior vice president, global human resources. mr. rogers has held this position since august 2009. from
may 2004 to august 2009, mr. rogers served as vice president, global human resources, from october 2003 to may 2004, mr. rogers served as director, human resources—americas
and from august 2000 to october 2003, he served as director, human resources for our polymers and base chemicals businesses. from the time he joined huntsman in 1994 to august 2000, mr. rogers
served as area manager, human resources—jefferson county operations. prior to joining huntsman, mr. rogers held a variety of positions with texaco chemical company. 

russ r. stolle, age 49, is senior vice president and deputy general counsel. mr. stolle was appointed to this position in january
2010. from october 2006 to january 2010, mr. stolle served as our senior vice president, global public affairs and communications, from november 2002 to october 2006, he served as vice
president and deputy general counsel, from october 2000 to november 2002 he served as vice president and chief technology counsel and from april 1994 to october 2000 he served as chief patent and
licensing counsel. prior to joining huntsman in 1994, mr. stolle had been an attorney with texaco inc. and an associate with the law firm of baker & botts. 

l. russell healy, age 56, is vice president and controller. mr. healy has served in this capacity since april 2004. from august
2001 to april 2004, mr. healy served as vice president, finance, from july 1999 to july 2001, he served as vice president and finance director for huntsman international, and from october 1995
to june 1999, he served as vice president, tax. prior to joining huntsman in 1995,
mr. healy was a partner with the accounting firm of deloitte & touche llp. mr. healy is a certified public accountant and holds a master's degree in accounting.
mr. healy has announced that he will retire following the filing of this report. for more information, see our report on form 8-k filed on october 21, 2011. 

randy w. wright, age 53, will be vice president and controller effective february 17, 2012. mr. wright currently serves as
assistant controller and director of financial reporting since july 2004. prior to joining huntsman in 2004, mr. wright held various positions with georgia-pacific corporation, riverwood
international, johns manville and pricewaterhousecoopers. mr. wright is a certified public accountant. 

sean douglas, age 47, is our vice president, corporate development since december 2009. mr. douglas served as vice president and
treasurer from 2002 to december 2009, vice president, finance from july 2001 to 2002 and vice president, administration from january 1997 to july 2001. mr. douglas is a certified public
accountant and, prior to joining huntsman in 1990, worked for the accounting firm of pricewaterhousecoopers. 

kevin c. hardman, age 48, is vice president, tax. mr. hardman served as chief tax officer from 1999 until he was appointed to his
current position in 2002. prior to joining huntsman in 1999, mr. hardman was a tax senior manager with the accounting firm of deloitte & touche llp, where he worked for
10 years. mr. hardman is a certified public accountant and holds a master's degree in tax accounting. 


john r. heskett, age 43, is vice president, planning and treasurer. mr. heskett has held this position since december 2009. from
september 2008 until october 2009, mr. heskett served as a vice president at boart longyear limited, a publicly-listed exploration drilling services and products company. mr. heskett
previously served as vice president, corporate development and investor relations for our company from august 2004 until september 2008 and was appointed vice president, corporate development in 2002.
mr. heskett also served as assistant treasurer for our company and several of our subsidiaries. prior to joining huntsman in 1997, mr. heskett was assistant vice president and
relationship manager for pnc bank, n.a., where he worked for a number of years. 


steven c. jorgensen, age 43, will be vice president, accounting shared services and internal controls effective february 17, 2012.
mr. jorgensen currently serves as vice president, internal 

51




 

table of contents

controls
and internal audit since may 2007. mr. jorgensen joined huntsman in may 2004 as director of internal controls and in may 2005 was appointed as director of internal audit and controls.
prior
to joining huntsman, mr. jorgensen was vice president and audit manager with general electric consumer finance, and prior to that he was an audit senior manager with the accounting firm of
deloitte & touche llp. mr. jorgensen is a certified public accountant and holds a master's degree in accounting. 

kurt d. ogden, age 43, is vice president, investor relations. prior to his appointment to this position in february 2009, mr. ogden
served as director, corporate finance since october 2004. prior to joining huntsman in 2004, mr. ogden held various positions with hillenbrand industries, pliant corporation and huntsman
chemical corporation. mr. ogden is a certified public accountant and holds a master's degree in business administration. 


maria csiba-womersley, age 53, is vice president and chief information officer. ms. csiba-womersley was appointed to this position
effective september 2006. ms. csiba-womersley served as global ebusiness director from 2004 to 2006 and also served as our director of global it planning and security. previously,
ms. csiba-womersley was a regional polymer sales manager, a business director for polypropylene and director of polymer logistics. ms. csiba-womersley joined huntsman in 1997. 

 
 
part ii        

 
item 5.    market for registrant's common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities        

market information and holders  


our common stock is listed on the new york stock exchange under the symbol "hun." as of february 3, 2012, there were
approximately 199 stockholders of record and the closing price of our common stock on the new york stock exchange was $13.85 per share. 

the
reported high and low sale prices of our common stock on the new york stock exchange for each of the periods set forth below are as follows: 
 


















period



 
 
high 
 
low 
 


2011
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


first quarter
 
$
19.10
 
$
15.71
 


second quarter
 
 
21.52
 
 
16.53
 


third quarter
 
 
20.36
 
 
9.88
 


fourth quarter
 
 
13.07
 
 
8.14
 



 
  
 


















period



 
 
high 
 
low 
 


2010
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


first quarter
 
$
14.24
 
$
10.92
 


second quarter
 
 
13.01
 
 
8.17
 


third quarter
 
 
11.74
 
 
8.20
 


fourth quarter
 
 
16.89
 
 
11.35
 



 
52






 



































 




table of contents 


dividends  

the following tables represent dividends on common stock for our company for the years ended december 31, (dollars in millions,
except per share payment amounts): 
 




















 
 
2011 
 


payment date



 
 
record date 
 
per share
payment amount 
 
total amount
paid 
 


march 31, 2011
 
march 15, 2011
 
$
0.10
 
$
24
 


june 30, 2011
 
june 15, 2011
 
 
0.10
 
 
24
 


september 30, 2011
 
september 15, 2011
 
 
0.10
 
 
24
 


december 30, 2011
 
december 15, 2011
 
 
0.10
 
 
24
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
 
 
 
 
 
$
96
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
  
 




















 
 
2010 
 


payment date



 
 
record date 
 
per share
payment amount 
 
total amount
paid 
 


march 31, 2010
 
march 15, 2010
 
$
0.10
 
$
24
 


june 30, 2010
 
june 15, 2010
 
 
0.10
 
 
24
 


september 30, 2010
 
september 15, 2010
 
 
0.10
 
 
24
 


december 31, 2010
 
december 15, 2010
 
 
0.10
 
 
24
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
 
 
 
 
 
$
96
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
  
 




















 
 
2009 
 


payment date



 
 
record date 
 
per share
payment amount 
 
total amount
paid 
 


march 31, 2009
 
march 16, 2009
 
$
0.10
 
$
24
 


june 30, 2009
 
june 15, 2009
 
 
0.10
 
 
24
 


september 30, 2009
 
september 15, 2009
 
 
0.10
 
 
24
 


december 31, 2009
 
december 15, 2009
 
 
0.10
 
 
24
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
 
 
 
 
 
$
96
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
securities authorized for issuance under equity compensation plans  

see "part iii, item 11. executive compensation" for information relating to our equity compensation plans. 


purchases of equity securities by the company  

the following table provides information with respect to shares of our common stock that we repurchased and shares of restricted stock
granted under our stock incentive plan that we withheld 

53




 

table of contents

upon
vesting to satisfy our tax withholding obligations during the three months ended december 31, 2011. 
 
























period



 
 
total
number
of shares
purchased 
 
average
price
paid
per share 
 
total number
of shares
purchased as part of
publicly announced
plans or programs 
 
maximum number
(or approximate dollar
value) of shares that
may yet be purchased under
the plans or programs 
 


october
 
 
—
 
$
—
 
 
—
 
$
49,863,881
 


november
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
49,863,881
 


december
 
 
2,107
 
 
10.72
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
 
2,107
 
$
10.72
 
 
—
 
$
49,863,881
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 







 

 
(1)there
were 2,107 shares of restricted stock granted under our stock incentive program that we withheld upon vesting to satisfy our tax withholding
obligations during december 2011. there were no shares repurchased under our publicly announced stock repurchase program.
(2)effective
august 5, 2011, our board of directors authorized our company to repurchase up to $100 million in shares of our common stock. during
the fourth quarter of 2011, we did not repurchase any shares of our common stock under the repurchase program. for more information, see "note 21. huntsman corporation stockholders'
equity—share repurchase program" to our consolidated financial statements. 
 
stock performance graph  

information relating to our stock performance graph will be contained in the definitive proxy statement for the annual meeting of our
stockholders and is incorporated herein by reference.  

 
item 6.    selected financial data        

the selected historical financial data set forth below presents our historical financial data as of and for the dates and periods
indicated. you should read the selected financial data in conjunction with "part ii. item 7. management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations" and
our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. 

54




 

table of contents

huntsman corporation  
 



























 
 
year ended december 31, 
 


(in millions except per share amounts)
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 
2008 
 
2007 
 


statements of operations data:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


revenues
 
$
11,221
 
$
9,250
 
$
7,665
 
$
10,056
 
$
9,496
 


gross profit
 
 
1,840
 
 
1,461
 
 
1,078
 
 
1,280
 
 
1,535
 


restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs
 
 
167
 
 
29
 
 
88
 
 
31
 
 
29
 


operating income
 
 
606
 
 
410
 
 
13
 
 
197
 
 
553
 


(expenses) income associated with the terminated merger and related litigation(a)
 
 
—
 
 
(4
)
 
835
 
 
780
 
 
(210
)


income (loss) from continuing operations
 
 
251
 
 
(9
)
 
125
 
 
512
 
 
61
 


(loss) income from discontinued operations, net of tax(b)
 
 
(1
)
 
42
 
 
(19
)
 
84
 
 
(235
)


extraordinary gain (loss) on the acquisition of a business, net of tax of nil(c)
 
 
4
 
 
(1
)
 
6
 
 
14
 
 
(7
)


net income (loss)
 
 
254
 
 
32
 
 
112
 
 
610
 
 
(181
)


net income (loss) attributable to huntsman corporation
 
 
247
 
 
27
 
 
114
 
 
609
 
 
(172
)


basic income (loss) per common share:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


income (loss) from continuing operations attributable to huntsman corporation common stockholders
 
$
1.03
 
$
(0.06
)
$
0.54
 
$
2.20
 
$
0.32
 


income (loss) from discontinued operations attributable to huntsman corporation common stockholders, net of tax(b)
 
 
—
 
 
0.17
 
 
(0.08
)
 
0.36
 
 
(1.07
)


extraordinary gain (loss) on the acquisition of a business attributable to huntsman corporation common stockholders, net of tax(c)
 
 
0.01
 
 
—
 
 
0.03
 
 
0.06
 
 
(0.03
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net income (loss) attributable to huntsman corporation common stockholders
 
$
1.04
 
$
0.11
 
$
0.49
 
$
2.62
 
$
(0.78
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


diluted income (loss) per common share:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


income (loss) from continuing operations attributable to huntsman corporation common stockholders
 
$
1.01
 
$
(0.06
)
$
0.53
 
$
2.18
 
$
0.30
 


income (loss) from discontinued operations attributable to huntsman corporation common stockholders, net of tax(b)
 
 
—
 
 
0.17
 
 
(0.08
)
 
0.36
 
 
(1.01
)


extraordinary gain (loss) on the acquisition of a business attributable to huntsman corporation common stockholders, net of tax(c)
 
 
0.01
 
 
—
 
 
0.03
 
 
0.06
 
 
(0.03
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net income (loss) attributable to huntsman corporation common stockholders
 
$
1.02
 
$
0.11
 
$
0.48
 
$
2.60
 
$
(0.74
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


other data:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


depreciation and amortization
 
$
439
 
$
405
 
$
442
 
$
398
 
$
413
 


capital expenditures
 
 
330
 
 
236
 
 
189
 
 
418
 
 
665
 


dividends per share
 
 
0.40
 
 
0.40
 
 
0.40
 
 
0.40
 
 
0.40
 


balance sheet data (at period end):
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total assets
 
$
8,657
 
$
8,714
 
$
8,626
 
$
8,058
 
$
8,166
 


total debt
 
 
3,946
 
 
4,150
 
 
4,217
 
 
3,888
 
 
3,574
 


total liabilities
 
 
6,881
 
 
6,864
 
 
6,761
 
 
6,426
 
 
6,313
 







 

 
(a)for
information regarding (expenses) income associated with our terminated merger with a subsidiary of hexion (now momentive) (the "terminated merger" or
the "hexion merger") and the related litigation, see "note 24. (expenses) income associated with the terminated merger and related litigation" to our consolidated financial statements. 
 
55




 

table of contents
 
 
(b)income
(loss) from discontinued operations represents the operating results, fire insurance settlement gains and loss on disposal of our former australian
styrenics business, our former u.s. base chemicals business, our former north american polymers business, our former european base chemicals and polymers business and our former tdi business. the u.s.
base chemicals business was sold on november 5, 2007, the north american polymers business was sold on august 1, 2007, the european base chemicals and polymers business was sold on
december 29, 2006 and the tdi business was sold on july 6, 2005. see "note 25. discontinued operations" to our consolidated financial statements.
(c)the
extraordinary gain (loss) on the acquisition of a business relates to the june 30, 2006 acquisition of our textile effects business. see
"note 3. business combinations and dispositions—textile effects acquisition" to our consolidated financial statements. 
 
  
item 7.    management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations        

overview  

we are a global manufacturer of differentiated organic chemical products and of inorganic chemical products. our products comprise a
broad range of chemicals and formulations, which we market globally to a diversified group of consumer and industrial customers. our products are used in a wide range of applications, including those
in the adhesives, aerospace, automotive, construction products, durable and non-durable consumer products, electronics, medical, packaging, paints and coatings, power generation, refining,
synthetic fiber, textile chemicals and dye industries. we are a leading global producer in many of our key product lines, including mdi, amines, surfactants, epoxy-based polymer formulations, textile
chemicals, dyes, maleic anhydride and titanium dioxide. our administrative, research and development and manufacturing operations are primarily conducted at the facilities listed in
"—item 2. properties" above, which are located in 30 countries. we employed approximately 12,000 associates worldwide at december 31, 2011. 


we
operate in five segments: polyurethanes, performance products, advanced materials, textile effects and pigments. our polyurethanes, performance products, advanced materials and
textile effects segments produce differentiated organic chemical products and our pigments segment produces inorganic chemical products. in a series of transactions beginning in 2006, we have sold or
shutdown substantially all of our former australian styrenics operations and our north american polymers and base chemicals operations. we report the results from these businesses as discontinued
operations. see "note 25. discontinued operations" to our consolidated financial statements. 

growth
in our polyurethanes and advanced materials segments has been driven by the continued substitution of our products for other materials across a broad range of applications, as
well as by the level of global economic activity. historically, demand for many of these products has grown at rates in excess of gdp growth. in polyurethanes, this growth, driven largely by asia, has
in recent years resulted in improved demand and higher industry capacity utilization rates for many of our key products, including mdi. 

in
our performance products segment, demand for our performance specialties has generally continued to grow at rates in excess of gdp as overall demand is significantly influenced by new
product and application development. demand for most of our performance intermediates has grown in line with gdp growth. over time, demand for maleic anhydride has generally grown at rates that
slightly exceed gdp growth. however, given its dependence on the upr market, which is influenced by construction end markets, maleic anhydride demand can be cyclical. 


demand
in our textile effects segment is driven primarily by consumer activity. consumer spending for goods incorporating our textile effects products is impacted significantly by a wide
range of economic factors, including personal incomes, housing and energy prices and other highly volatile 

56




 

table of contents

factors.
accordingly, demand for our textile effects products has been volatile and appears likely to remain volatile. 


historically,
demand for titanium dioxide pigments has grown at rates approximately equal to global gdp growth. pigment prices have historically reflected industry-wide
operating rates but have typically lagged behind movements in these rates by up to twelve months due to the effects of product stocking and destocking by customers and producers, contract arrangements
and seasonality. the industry experiences some seasonality in its sales because sales of paints, the largest end use for titanium dioxide, generally peak during the spring and summer months in the
northern hemisphere. this results in greater sales volumes in the second and third quarters of the year. during 2012, we expect to benefit from certain ore supply contracts in our pigments segment
that will effectively supply approximately 40% of our ore requirements at prices close to 2011 market levels, which are significantly below current market prices. a majority of these contracts will
expire at the end of 2012, with the resulting benefits reflected through most of the first quarter of 2013. these contracts did not materially benefit our pigments segment during 2011. 

for
further information regarding sales price and demand trends, see "results of operations—segment analysis—year ended december 31, 2011 compared to year
ended december 31, 2010" and the tables captioned "year ended december 31, 2011 vs. 2010, period-over-period increase (decrease)" and "fourth quarter 2011 vs.
third quarter 2011, period-over-period increase (decrease)" below. 

outlook  

demand for our products is generally sensitive to global economic growth. our revenue is distributed approximately
one-third in north america, one-third in europe, slightly less than one-quarter in asia-pacific and the balance in the rest of the world. our operations
in europe continue to be impacted by the uncertain european economy, and we expect slow growth across our businesses in europe. growth in other regions for most of our products is expected to improve
subject to seasonal demand fluctuations. 

we
anticipate that we will see an improving global economy from this point forward. most of our businesses have strong upside potential as we see a continued recovery in the world's
economy. in
2012, we expect margin pressure on our pigments segment to be offset by improved earnings in our other segments. 

the
following summarizes key considerations that could impact future performance of our operating segments: 


polyurethanes: 



•improving mdi margins 
•improving mdi demand 
•continued strength in po/mtbe margins 
•improving global economic environment 


performance products: 



•u.s. gulf coast raw material cost advantage 
•near term amines margin pressure 
•improving global economic environment 

57




 

table of contents

advanced materials: 



•reorganization and restructuring benefit 
•improving global economic environment 


textile effects: 



•restructuring benefits beginning in the second half of 2012 
•improving global economic environment 


pigments: 



•improving sales portfolio 
•higher raw material costs 
•favorable ore contracts expiring at end of 2012 
•improving global economic environment 


we
expect to spend approximately $425 million in 2012 on capital expenditures, net of reimbursements, largely for growth initiatives and maintenance. 


we
expect our full year 2012 effective tax rate to be approximately 30% to 35%, consistent with what we believe to be our long-term effective income tax rate. 

58






 




































 
table of contents 

results of operations  

for each of our company and huntsman international, the following tables set forth the consolidated results of operations for the years
ended december 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 (dollars in millions): 

huntsman corporation  
 



























 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
percent change 
 


 
 
year ended december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 vs 2010 
 
2010 vs 2009 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


revenues
 
$
11,221
 
$
9,250
 
$
7,665
 
 
21
%
 
21
%


cost of goods sold
 
 
9,381
 
 
7,789
 
 
6,587
 
 
20
%
 
18
%


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


gross profit
 
 
1,840
 
 
1,461
 
 
1,078
 
 
26
%
 
36
%


operating expenses
 
 
1,067
 
 
1,022
 
 
977
 
 
4
%
 
5
%


restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs
 
 
167
 
 
29
 
 
88
 
 
476
%
 
(67
)%


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


operating income
 
 
606
 
 
410
 
 
13
 
 
48
%
 
nm
 


interest expense, net
 
 
(249
)
 
(229
)
 
(238
)
 
9
%
 
(4
)%


loss on accounts receivable securitization program
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(23
)
 
—
 
 
nm
 


equity in income of investment in unconsolidated affiliates
 
 
8
 
 
24
 
 
3
 
 
(67
)%
 
700
%


loss on early extinguishment of debt
 
 
(7
)
 
(183
)
 
(21
)
 
(96
)%
 
771
%


(expenses) income associated with the terminated merger and related litigation
 
 
—
 
 
(4
)
 
835
 
 
nm
 
 
nm
 


other income
 
 
2
 
 
2
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
nm
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


income from continuing operations before income taxes
 
 
360
 
 
20
 
 
569
 
 
nm
 
 
(96
)%


income tax expense
 
 
(109
)
 
(29
)
 
(444
)
 
276
%
 
(93
)%


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


income (loss) from continuing operations
 
 
251
 
 
(9
)
 
125
 
 
nm
 
 
nm
 


(loss) income from discontinued operations (including gain on disposal of $1 in 2009), net of tax
 
 
(1
)
 
42
 
 
(19
)
 
nm
 
 
nm
 


extraordinary gain (loss) on the acquisition of a business, net of tax of nil
 
 
4
 
 
(1
)
 
6
 
 
nm
 
 
nm
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net income
 
 
254
 
 
32
 
 
112
 
 
694
%
 
(71
)%


net (income) loss attributable to noncontrolling interests
 
 
(7
)
 
(5
)
 
2
 
 
40
%
 
nm
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net income attributable to huntsman corporation
 
 
247
 
 
27
 
 
114
 
 
815
%
 
(76
)%


interest expense, net
 
 
249
 
 
229
 
 
238
 
 
9
%
 
(4
)%


income tax expense from continuing operations
 
 
109
 
 
29
 
 
444
 
 
276
%
 
(93
)%


income tax (benefit) expense from discontinued operations
 
 
(5
)
 
10
 
 
(80
)
 
nm
 
 
nm
 


depreciation and amortization
 
 
439
 
 
405
 
 
442
 
 
8
%
 
(8
)%


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


ebitda(1)
 
$
1,039
 
$
700
 
$
1,158
 
 
48
%
 
(40
)%


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net income per share:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


basic
 
$
1.04
 
$
0.11
 
$
0.49
 
 
845
%
 
(78
)%


diluted
 
 
1.02
 
 
0.11
 
 
0.48
 
 
827
%
 
(77
)%


net cash provided by (used in) operating activities
 
 
365
 
 
(58
)
 
1,104
 
 
nm
 
 
nm
 


net cash used in investing activities
 
 
(280
)
 
(182
)
 
(205
)
 
54
%
 
(11
)%


net cash (used in) provided by financing activities
 
 
(490
)
 
(543
)
 
184
 
 
(10
)%
 
nm
 


other non-gaap measures:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


adjusted ebitda(1)
 
$
1,214
 
$
875
 
$
545
 
 
39
%
 
60
%


adjusted net income (loss)(2)
 
 
408
 
 
200
 
 
(298
)
 
104
%
 
nm
 


adjusted income (loss) per share(2):
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


basic
 
 
1.72
 
 
0.85
 
 
(1.27
)
 
102
%
 
nm
 


diluted
 
 
1.69
 
 
0.83
 
 
(1.27
)
 
104
%
 
nm
 


capital expenditures, net of reimbursements(3)
 
 
327
 
 
202
 
 
189
 
 
62
%
 
7
%



 
59




 

table of contents

huntsman international  
 



























 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
percent change 
 


 
 
year ended december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 vs 2010 
 
2010 vs 2009 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


revenues
 
$
11,221
 
$
9,250
 
$
7,665
 
 
21
%
 
21
%


cost of goods sold
 
 
9,363
 
 
7,772
 
 
6,570
 
 
20
%
 
18
%


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


gross profit
 
 
1,858
 
 
1,478
 
 
1,095
 
 
26
%
 
35
%


operating expenses
 
 
1,062
 
 
1,006
 
 
966
 
 
6
%
 
4
%


restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs
 
 
167
 
 
29
 
 
88
 
 
476
%
 
(67
)%


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


operating income
 
 
629
 
 
443
 
 
41
 
 
42
%
 
980
%


interest expense, net
 
 
(262
)
 
(248
)
 
(240
)
 
6
%
 
3
%


loss on accounts receivable securitization program
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(23
)
 
—
 
 
nm
 


equity in income of investment in unconsolidated affiliates
 
 
8
 
 
24
 
 
3
 
 
(67
)%
 
700
%


loss on early extinguishment of debt
 
 
(7
)
 
(37
)
 
(21
)
 
(81
)%
 
76
%


other income
 
 
2
 
 
2
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
nm
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


income (loss) from continuing operations before income taxes
 
 
370
 
 
184
 
 
(240
)
 
101
%
 
nm
 


income tax expense
 
 
(113
)
 
(40
)
 
(159
)
 
183
%
 
(75
)%


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


income (loss) from continuing operations
 
 
257
 
 
144
 
 
(399
)
 
78
%
 
nm
 


(loss) income from discontinued operations (including gain on disposal of $1 in 2009), net of tax
 
 
(1
)
 
42
 
 
(19
)
 
nm
 
 
nm
 


extraordinary gain (loss) on the acquisition of a business, net of tax of nil
 
 
4
 
 
(1
)
 
6
 
 
nm
 
 
nm
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net income (loss)
 
 
260
 
 
185
 
 
(412
)
 
41
%
 
nm
 


net (income) loss attributable to noncontrolling interests
 
 
(7
)
 
(5
)
 
2
 
 
40
%
 
nm
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net income (loss) attributable to huntsman international llc
 
 
253
 
 
180
 
 
(410
)
 
41
%
 
nm
 


interest expense, net
 
 
262
 
 
248
 
 
240
 
 
6
%
 
3
%


income tax expense (benefit) from continuing operations
 
 
113
 
 
40
 
 
159
 
 
183
%
 
(75
)%


income tax (benefit) expense from discontinued operations
 
 
(5
)
 
10
 
 
(80
)
 
nm
 
 
nm
 


depreciation and amortization
 
 
416
 
 
382
 
 
420
 
 
9
%
 
(9
)%


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


ebitda(1)
 
$
1,039
 
$
860
 
$
329
 
 
21
%
 
161
%


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net cash provided by (used in) operating activities
 
$
432
 
$
(46
)
$
420
 
 
nm
 
 
nm
 


net cash used in investing activities
 
 
(337
)
 
(238
)
 
(212
)
 
42
%
 
12
%


net cash (used in) provided by financing activities
 
 
(418
)
 
(78
)
 
619
 
 
436
%
 
nm
 


other non-gaap measures:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


adjusted ebitda(1)
 
$
1,214
 
$
885
 
$
551
 
 
37
%
 
61
%


adjusted net income(2)
 
 
414
 
 
212
 
 
(296
)
 
95
%
 
nm
 


capital expenditures, net of reimbursements(3)
 
 
327
 
 
202
 
 
189
 
 
62
%
 
7
%



 
 



nm—not meaningful 


(1)ebitda
is defined as net income (loss) attributable to huntsman corporation or huntsman international llc, as appropriate, before interest, income
taxes, depreciation and amortization. we believe that ebitda supplements an investor's understanding of our financial performance. however, ebitda should not be considered in isolation or viewed as a
substitute for net income attributable to huntsman corporation or huntsman international llc, as appropriate, or other measures of performance as defined by gaap. moreover, ebitda as used
herein is not necessarily comparable to other similarly titled measures of other companies due to potential inconsistencies in the method of calculation. our management uses ebitda to assess financial
performance by reviewing ebitda as a general indicator of economic performance compared with prior periods. because ebitda excludes interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization, ebitda
provides an indicator of general economic performance that is not affected 
60




 

table of contents



by
debt restructurings, fluctuations in interest rates or effective tax rates, or levels of depreciation and amortization. accordingly, our management believes this type of measurement is useful for
comparing general operating performance from period to period and making certain related management decisions. ebitda is also used by securities analysts, lenders and others in their evaluation of
different companies because it excludes certain items that can vary widely across different industries or among
companies within the same industry. for example, interest expense can be highly dependent on a company's capital structure, debt levels and credit ratings. therefore, the impact of interest expense on
earnings can vary significantly among companies. in addition, the tax positions of companies can vary because of their differing abilities to take advantage of tax benefits and because of the tax
policies of the various jurisdictions in which they operate. as a result, effective tax rates and tax expense can vary considerably among companies. finally, companies employ productive assets of
different ages and utilize different methods of acquiring and depreciating such assets. this can result in considerable variability in the relative costs of productive assets and the depreciation and
amortization expense among companies. nevertheless, our management recognizes that there are material limitations associated with the use of ebitda in the evaluation of our company as compared to net
income attributable to huntsman corporation or huntsman international llc, as appropriate, which reflects overall financial performance, including the effects of interest, income taxes,
depreciation and amortization. ebitda excludes interest expense. because we have borrowed money in order to finance our operations, interest expense is a necessary element of our costs and ability to
generate revenue. therefore, any measure that excludes interest expense has material limitations. ebitda also excludes taxes. because the payment of taxes is a necessary element of our operations, any
measure that excludes tax expense has material limitations. finally, ebitda excludes depreciation and amortization expense. because we use capital assets, depreciation and amortization expense is a
necessary element of our costs and ability to generate revenue. therefore, any measure that excludes depreciation and amortization expense has material limitations. our management compensates for the
limitations of using ebitda by using it to supplement gaap results to provide a more complete understanding of the factors and trends affecting the business rather than gaap results alone. our
management also uses other metrics to evaluate capital structure, tax planning and capital investment decisions. for example, our management uses credit ratings and net debt ratios to evaluate capital
structure, effective tax rate by jurisdiction to evaluate tax planning, and payback period and internal rate of return to evaluate capital investments. our management also uses trade working capital
to evaluate its investment in accounts receivable and inventory, net of accounts payable.  

adjusted
ebitda is computed by eliminating the following from ebitda: loss on early extinguishment of debt; legal settlements; loss on accounts receivable securitization program; ebitda from
discontinued operations; acquisition expenses; expenses (income) associated with the terminated merger and related litigation (huntsman corporation only); gains on the sales of businesses and assets;
extraordinary gain (loss) on the acquisition of a business; gain on consolidation of a variable interest entity and restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs (credits). 

in
prior reports, we excluded unallocated foreign exchange gains or losses in our presentation of adjusted ebitda. in our current and future presentations of adjusted ebitda we do not exclude
unallocated foreign exchange gains or losses. the amounts for prior periods have been recast to conform to the current presentation. we made this change to more accurately reflect the ongoing cost of
operating a global business.  

adjusted
ebitda is presented solely as a supplemental disclosure to ebitda and reported gaap measures because we believe that it is indicative of our operating performance and is frequently used as a
valuation measure of chemical companies. our management also uses adjusted ebitda to evaluate the core operating performance of our segments and business. 


61




 

table of contents



in
addition to the limitations of ebitda noted above, adjusted ebitda excludes items that may be recurring in nature and should not be disregarded in the evaluation of performance. however, we believe
it is useful to exclude such items to provide a supplemental analysis of current results and trends compared to other periods for the following reasons: certain excluded items can vary significantly
depending on specific underlying transactions or events, and the variability of such items may not relate specifically to current operating results or trends; and certain excluded items, while
potentially recurring in future periods, may not be indicative of future results.  

adjusted
ebitda should not be construed as an alternative to net income applicable to huntsman corporation or huntsman international, as appropriate, as an indicator of performance, or as any other
measure determined in accordance with gaap.  

we
believe that net income (loss) attributable to huntsman corporation or huntsman international, as appropriate, is the performance measure calculated and presented in accordance with gaap that is
most directly comparable to ebitda and adjusted ebitda.  

for
each of our company and huntsman international, the following tables set forth certain items of (income) expense included in ebitda (in millions): 

huntsman corporation


 





















 
 
year ended december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


net income attributable to huntsman corporation
 
$
247
 
$
27
 
$
114
 


interest expense, net
 
 
249
 
 
229
 
 
238
 


income tax expense from continuing operations
 
 
109
 
 
29
 
 
444
 


income tax (benefit) expense from discontinued operations
 
 
(5
)
 
10
 
 
(80
)


depreciation and amortization
 
 
439
 
 
405
 
 
442
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


ebitda
 
 
1,039
 
 
700
 
 
1,158
 


loss on early extinguishment of debt
 
 
7
 
 
183
 
 
21
 


legal settlements
 
 
46
 
 
8
 
 
—
 


loss on accounts receivable securitization program
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
23
 


ebitda from discontinued operations
 
 
6
 
 
(53
)
 
97
 


acquisition expenses
 
 
5
 
 
3
 
 
—
 


expenses (income) associated with the terminated merger and related litigation
 
 
—
 
 
4
 
 
(835
)


gains on sale of businesses and assets
 
 
(40
)
 
—
 
 
(1
)


extraordinary (gain) loss on the acquisition of a business
 
 
(4
)
 
1
 
 
(6
)


gain on consolidation of a variable interest entity
 
 
(12
)
 
—
 
 
—
 


restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs (credits):
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


polyurethanes
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
2
 


performance products
 
 
—
 
 
3
 
 
—
 


advanced materials
 
 
20
 
 
(2
)
 
13
 


textile effects
 
 
135
 
 
15
 
 
6
 


pigments
 
 
10
 
 
8
 
 
53
 


corporate and other
 
 
2
 
 
5
 
 
14
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs
 
 
167
 
 
29
 
 
88
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


adjusted ebitda
 
$
1,214
 
$
875
 
$
545
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
62




 

table of contents



huntsman international


 





















 
 
year ended december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


net income (loss) attributable to huntsman international
 
$
253
 
$
180
 
$
(410
)


interest expense, net
 
 
262
 
 
248
 
 
240
 


income tax expense from continuing operations
 
 
113
 
 
40
 
 
159
 


income tax (benefit) expense from discontinued operations
 
 
(5
)
 
10
 
 
(80
)


depreciation and amortization
 
 
416
 
 
382
 
 
420
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


ebitda
 
 
1,039
 
 
860
 
 
329
 


loss on early extinguishment of debt
 
 
7
 
 
37
 
 
21
 


legal settlements
 
 
46
 
 
8
 
 
—
 


loss on accounts receivable securitization program
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
23
 


ebitda from discontinued operations
 
 
6
 
 
(53
)
 
97
 


acquisition expenses
 
 
5
 
 
3
 
 
—
 


gains on sale of businesses and assets
 
 
(40
)
 
—
 
 
(1
)


extraordinary (gain) loss on the acquisition of a business
 
 
(4
)
 
1
 
 
(6
)


gain on consolidation of a variable interest entity
 
 
(12
)
 
—
 
 
—
 


restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs (credits):
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


polyurethanes
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
2
 


performance products
 
 
—
 
 
3
 
 
—
 


advanced materials
 
 
20
 
 
(2
)
 
13
 


textile effects
 
 
135
 
 
15
 
 
6
 


pigments
 
 
10
 
 
8
 
 
53
 


corporate and other
 
 
2
 
 
5
 
 
14
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs
 
 
167
 
 
29
 
 
88
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


adjusted ebitda
 
$
1,214
 
$
885
 
$
551
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
 
(2)adjusted
net income (loss) is computed by eliminating the after-tax amounts related to the following from net income applicable to huntsman
corporation or huntsman international, as appropriate: (a) loss on early extinguishment of debt; (b) legal settlements; (c) discount amortization of settlement financing;
(d) loss (income) from discontinued operations; (e) acquisition expenses; (f) expenses (income) associated with the terminated merger and related litigation (huntsman corporation
only); (g) gains on the sale of businesses and assets; (h) extraordinary (gain) loss on the acquisition of a business; (i) gain on consolidation of a variable interest entity; and
(j) restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs. the income tax impacts of each adjusting item is calculated using the statutory rates in the applicable taxing jurisdiction and
considering valuation allowances on deferred tax assets in each jurisdiction. we do not adjust for changes in tax valuation allowances because we do not believe it provides more meaningful information
than is provided under gaap. basic adjusted income (loss) per share excludes dilution and is computed by dividing adjusted net income (loss) by the weighted average number of shares outstanding during
the period. diluted income (loss) per share reflects all potential dilutive common shares outstanding during the period and is computed by dividing adjusted net income (loss) by the weighted average
number of shares outstanding during the period increased by the number of additional shares that would have been outstanding as dilutive securities.  


in
prior reports, we excluded unallocated foreign exchange gains or losses in our presentation of adjusted net income (loss). in our current and future presentations of adjusted net income (loss), we
do not exclude unallocated foreign exchange gains or losses. the amounts for prior periods have been recast to conform to the current presentation. we made this change to more accurately reflect the
ongoing cost of operating a global business.  

adjusted
net income (loss) and adjusted income (loss) per share amounts are presented solely as supplemental disclosures to net income applicable to huntsman corporation or huntsman international, as
appropriate, and income (loss) per share because we believe that these measures are indicative of our operating performance. adjusted net income (loss) and adjusted income (loss) per share exclude
items that may be recurring in nature and should not be disregarded in the evaluation of performance. however, we believe it is useful to exclude such items to provide a supplemental analysis of
current results and trends compared to other periods for the following reasons: certain excluded items can vary significantly depending on specific underlying transactions or events, and the
variability of such items may not relate specifically to current operating results or trends; and certain excluded items, while potentially recurring in future periods, may not be indicative of future
results. 


63




 


table of contents



for
each of our company and huntsman international, the following tables set forth certain items of (income) expense included in adjusted net income. 

huntsman corporation


 





















 
 
year ended december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


net income attributable to huntsman corporation
 
$
247
 
$
27
 
$
114
 


loss on early extinguishment of debt, net of tax of $(3), $(22) and $(8) in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively
 
 
4
 
 
161
 
 
13
 


legal settlements, net of tax of $(17), $(3) and nil in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively
 
 
29
 
 
5
 
 
—
 


discount amortization on settlement financing, net of tax of $(10), $(10) and $(5) in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively
 
 
18
 
 
16
 
 
9
 


loss (income) from discontinued operations, net of tax of $(5), $10 and $(80) in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively
 
 
1
 
 
(42
)
 
19
 


acquisition expenses, net of tax of $(1), $(1) and $1 in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively
 
 
4
 
 
2
 
 
1
 


expenses (income) associated with the terminated merger and related litigation, net of tax of nil, $(1) and $309 in 2011, 2010 and 2009,
respectively
 
 
—
 
 
3
 
 
(526
)


gains on sale of businesses and assets, net of tax of $3, nil and nil in 2011, 2010 and 2009, each
 
 
(37
)
 
—
 
 
(1
)


extraordinary (gain) loss on the acquisition of a business, net of tax of nil for 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively
 
 
(4
)
 
1
 
 
(6
)


gain on consolidation of a variable interest entity, net of tax of $2
 
 
(10
)
 
—
 
 
—
 


restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs, net of tax of $(11), $(2) and $(9) in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively
 
 
156
 
 
27
 
 
79
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


adjusted net income (loss)
 
$
408
 
$
200
 
$
(298
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


weighted average shares-diluted
 
 
241.7
 
 
241.0
 
 
233.9
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
 

huntsman international


 





















 
 
year ended december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


net income (loss) attributable to huntsman international
 
$
253
 
$
180
 
$
(410
)


loss on early extinguishment of debt, net of tax of $(3), $(14) and $(8) in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively
 
 
4
 
 
23
 
 
13
 


legal settlements, net of tax of $(17), $(3) and nil in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively
 
 
29
 
 
5
 
 
—
 


discount amortization on settlement financing, net of tax of $(10), $(10) and $(5) in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively
 
 
18
 
 
16
 
 
9
 


loss (income) from discontinued operations, net of tax of $(5), $10 and $(80) in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively
 
 
1
 
 
(42
)
 
19
 


acquisition expenses, net of tax of $(1), $(1) and $1 in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively
 
 
4
 
 
2
 
 
1
 


gains on sale of businesses and assets, net of tax of $3, nil and nil in 2011, 2010 and 2009, each
 
 
(37
)
 
—
 
 
(1
)


extraordinary (gain) loss on the acquisition of a business, net of tax of nil for 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively
 
 
(4
)
 
1
 
 
(6
)


gain on consolidation of a variable interest entity, net of tax of $2
 
 
(10
)
 
—
 
 
—
 


restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs, net of tax of $(11), $(2) and $(9) in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively
 
 
156
 
 
27
 
 
79
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


adjusted net income (loss)
 
$
414
 
$
212
 
$
(296
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
 
(3)capital
expenditures, net of reimbursements represent cash paid for capital expenditures less reimbursements of capital expenditures from insurance
settlements, other legal settlements and contributions from noncontrolling shareholders in consolidated entities. during 2011, 2010 and 2009, capital expenditures of $330 million,
$236 million and $189 million, respectively, were reimbursed in part by $3 million, $34 million and nil, respectively, from insurance settlement proceeds or other legal
settlements. 
64






 




































 
table of contents 

year ended december 31, 2011 compared with year ended december 31, 2010  

for year ended december 31, 2011, the net income attributable to huntsman corporation was $247 million on revenues of
$11,221 million, compared with net income attributable to huntsman corporation of $27 million on revenues of $9,250 million for the same period of 2010. for the year ended
december 31, 2011, the net income attributable to huntsman international llc was $253 million on revenues of $11,221 million, compared with net income attributable to huntsman
international llc of $180 million on revenues of $9,250 million for the same period of 2010. the increase of $220 million in net income attributable to huntsman corporation
and the increase of $73 million in net income attributable to huntsman international llc was the result of the following items:



•revenues for 2011 increased by $1,971 million, or 21%, as compared with the 2010 period. the increase was due
principally to higher average selling prices in all of our segments and higher sales volumes in all of our segments except advanced materials, textile effects and pigments. see "—segment
analysis" below. 
•our gross profit and the gross profit of huntsman international for 2011 increased by $379 million and
$380 million, respectively, or 26% each, as compared with the 2010 period. the increase resulted from higher gross margins in all of our segments except advanced materials and textile effects.
see "—segment analysis" below. 
•our operating expenses and the operating expenses of huntsman international for 2011 increased by $45 million and
$56 million, or 4% and 6%, respectively, as compared with the 2010 period. operating expenses increased by $50 million in 2011 due to the impact of translating foreign currency amounts
to the u.s. dollar and by $46 million due to higher expenses related to legal settlements, partially offset by a $12 million gain recorded upon consolidation of our sasol-huntsman joint
venture and a $34 million gain recorded on the sale of our stereolithography resin and digitalis® machine manufacturing business. for more information on legal settlements, see
"note 19. commitments and contingencies—legal matters" to our consolidated financial statements. for more information on the consolidation of our sasol-huntsman joint venture, see
"note 7. variable interest entities" to our consolidated financial statements. for more information on the sale of our stereolithography resin and digitalis® machine manufacturing
businesses, see "note 3. business combinations and dispositions" to our consolidated financial statements. 
•restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs for 2011 increased to $167 million from $29 million in the 2010
period. for more information, see "note 11. restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs" to our consolidated financial statements. 
•our net interest expense and the net interest expense of huntsman international for 2011 increased by $20 million
and $14 million, respectively, or 9% and 6%, respectively, as compared with 2010. in 2010, we benefited from a $12 million reduction in interest expense related to the ineffective
portion of a cross currency swap, and interest expense in the 2011 period is also higher due to the consolidation of our sasol-huntsman and arabian amines company joint ventures. for more information,
see "note 7. variable interest entities" to our consolidated financial statements. 
•equity in income of investment in unconsolidated affiliates for 2011 decreased to $8 million from
$24 million in the 2010 period. during 2010, we recorded a nonrecurring $18 million credit to equity income of investment in unconsolidated affiliates to appropriately reflect our
investment in sasol-huntsman. for more information, see "note 6. investment in unconsolidated affiliates" to our consolidated financial statements. 

65




 

table of contents



•our loss on early extinguishment of debt for 2011 decreased to $7 million from $183 million in the 2010
period as a result of higher net repayments of indebtedness in 2010 as compared to 2011. in 2010, we recorded a loss on early extinguishment of debt from the repurchase of our 7% convertible notes due
2018 (huntsman corporation only) for $146 million. for more information see "note 14. debt" to our consolidated financial statements. 
•expenses associated with the terminated merger and related litigation for 2010 consisted primarily of $3 million of
bonuses paid to certain members of the board of directors, upon the recommendation of an independent committee of the board of directors, for their efforts in connection with the litigation with
hexion and apollo following the terminated merger. 
•our income tax expense increased by $80 million to an expense of $109 million for 2011 as compared with an
expense of $29 million for 2010. huntsman international's income tax expense increased by $73 million to an expense of $113 million for 2011, as compared with an expense of
$40 million for 2010. our and huntsman international's tax obligations are affected by the mix of income and losses in the tax jurisdictions in which we operate. other than pre-tax
earnings, our and huntsman international's income tax expense for 2011 as compared with 2010 was primarily impacted by the following: 2011 tax benefits associated with the net release of valuation
allowances of $22 million as compared to 2010 releases of valuation allowances of $20 million; 2011 tax benefits of $1 million compared to the 2010 tax benefits of
$4 million related to recognizing a tax benefit for operating losses in certain jurisdictions with valuation allowances and current other comprehensive income. for more information, see
"note 18. income taxes" to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report. 
•loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, for 2011 was $1 million compared to income from discontinued
operations of $42 million in 2010. the decrease in income from discontinued operations resulted principally from a $110 million pretax gain recognized in the second quarter of 2010 in
connection with the final settlement of our insurance claims related to the 2006 fire at our former port arthur, texas plant, offset in part by related income taxes, legal and other costs. for more
information, see "note 25. discontinued operations" to our consolidated financial statements. 
•during 2010, we recorded an extraordinary loss on the acquisition of a business, net of tax, of $1 million
resulting from the settlement of contingent purchase price consideration related to our 2006 acquisition of ciba's textile effects business (the "textile effects acquisition"), offset in part by the
reimbursement by ciba of certain costs pursuant to the acquisition agreements. the extraordinary gain in 2011 relates primarily to reimbursement by ciba of certain costs pursuant to the acquisition
agreements. for more information, see "note 3. business combinations and dispositions—textile effects acquisition" to our consolidated financial statements. 

66




 


table of contents

segment analysis  

year ended december 31, 2011 compared to year ended december 31, 2010  
 





















 
 
year ended
december 31, 
 
 
 


 
 
percent
change 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 


revenues
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


polyurethanes
 
$
4,434
 
$
3,605
 
 
23
%


performance products
 
 
3,301
 
 
2,659
 
 
24
%


advanced materials
 
 
1,372
 
 
1,244
 
 
10
%


textile effects
 
 
737
 
 
787
 
 
(6
)%


pigments
 
 
1,642
 
 
1,213
 
 
35
%


eliminations
 
 
(265
)
 
(258
)
 
3
%


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
$
11,221
 
$
9,250
 
 
21
%


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


huntsman corporation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


segment ebitda
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


polyurethanes
 
$
469
 
$
319
 
 
47
%


performance products
 
 
385
 
 
363
 
 
6
%


advanced materials
 
 
125
 
 
143
 
 
(13
)%


textile effects
 
 
(199
)
 
1
 
 
nm
 


pigments
 
 
501
 
 
205
 
 
144
%


corporate and other
 
 
(236
)
 
(384
)
 
(39
)%


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


subtotal
 
 
1,045
 
 
647
 
 
62
%


discontinued operations
 
 
(6
)
 
53
 
 
nm
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
$
1,039
 
$
700
 
 
48
%


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


huntsman international
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


segment ebitda
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


polyurethanes
 
$
469
 
$
319
 
 
47
%


performance products
 
 
385
 
 
363
 
 
6
%


advanced materials
 
 
125
 
 
143
 
 
(13
)%


textile effects
 
 
(199
)
 
1
 
 
nm
 


pigments
 
 
501
 
 
205
 
 
144
%


corporate and other
 
 
(236
)
 
(224
)
 
5
%


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


subtotal
 
 
1,045
 
 
807
 
 
29
%


discontinued operations
 
 
(6
)
 
53
 
 
nm
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
$
1,039
 
$
860
 
 
21
%


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
  
 
























 
 
year ended december 31, 2011 vs. 2010 
 


 
 
average selling
price(1) 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
local
currency 
 
foreign
currency
translation
impact 
 
mix &
other 
 
sales
volumes(1) 
 


period-over-period increase (decrease)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


polyurethanes
 
 
16
%
 
2
%
 
(3
)%
 
8
%


performance products
 
 
20
%
 
2
%
 
(1
)%
 
3
%


advanced materials
 
 
7
%
 
3
%
 
—
 
 
—
 


textile effects
 
 
—
 
 
3
%
 
—
 
 
(9
)%


pigments
 
 
34
%
 
4
%
 
(1
)%
 
(2
)%


total company
 
 
16
%
 
3
%
 
3
%
 
5
%



 
67




 

table of contents


 
























 
 
fourth quarter 2011 vs. third quarter 2011 
 


 
 
average selling
price(1) 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
local
currency 
 
foreign
currency
translation
impact 
 
mix &
other 
 
sales
volumes(1) 
 


period-over-period increase (decrease)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


polyurethanes
 
 
(2
)%
 
(2
)%
 
—
 
 
(10
)%


performance products
 
 
(1
)%
 
(1
)%
 
(4
)%
 
(5
)%


advanced materials
 
 
(2
)%
 
(3
)%
 
1
%
 
(6
)%


textile effects
 
 
(3
)%
 
(3
)%
 
—
 
 
7
%


pigments
 
 
7
%
 
(3
)%
 
1
%
 
(17
)%


total company
 
 
(2
)%
 
(2
)%
 
1
%
 
(9
)%







 

 
(1)excludes
revenues and sales volumes from tolling arrangements and byproducts. 

nm—not
meaningful 
 

polyurethanes  

the increase in revenues in our polyurethanes segment for 2011 compared to 2010 was primarily due to higher average selling prices and
higher sales volumes. mdi average selling prices increased primarily in response to higher raw material costs, improved demand and the strength of major european currencies against the u.s. dollar.
po/mtbe average selling prices increased primarily in response to higher raw material costs and industry supply constraints in the first half of 2011. mdi sales volumes increased primarily in response
to improved demand in the insulation, automotive and composite wood panels sectors. po/mtbe sales volumes increased compared to 2010 primarily due to a planned maintenance outage at our port neches,
texas facility during 2010. the increase in segment ebitda was primarily due to higher sales volumes and margins, partially offset by higher manufacturing and selling, general and administrative
costs. segment ebitda in 2010 was also negatively impacted by an estimated $40 million as a result of the planned maintenance outage at our port neches, texas facility. 

performance products  

the increase in revenues in our performance products segment for 2011 compared to 2010 was primarily due to higher average selling
prices and higher sales volumes. average selling prices increased across all product groups principally in response to higher raw material costs and the strength of major european currencies against
the u.s. dollar. sales volumes increased mainly due to higher demand for ethyleneamines and eg, offset by lower sales of other amines and european surfactants. in addition, sales volumes increased as
a result of our consolidation of the sasol-huntsman joint venture and our acquisition of the chemical business of laffans petrochemicals limited (the "laffans acquisition"), both in april 2011. the
increase in segment ebitda was primarily due to higher sales volumes and higher margins as selling prices increased faster than raw material prices, partially offset by increased fixed costs. in
addition, in 2011, we recorded a gain of $12 million in connection with the consolidation of the sasol-huntsman joint venture, and in 2010, we recorded a nonrecurring $18 million credit
to appropriately reflect our investment in the sasol-huntsman joint venture. 

68






 




































 
table of contents 

advanced materials  

the increase in revenues in our advanced materials segment for 2011 compared to 2010 was primarily due to higher average selling prices
partially offset by lower sales volumes. average selling prices increased in all regions and across the entire product portfolio in response to higher raw material costs and the strength of major
european currencies against the u.s. dollar. sales volumes decreased in the asia-pacific region, primarily as a result of lower demand in the wind energy market, as well as in europe and
the americas, while sales volumes increased in india. the decrease in segment ebitda was primarily due to lower margins, the impact of stronger major european currencies against the u.s. dollar,
higher manufacturing and selling, general and administrative costs and higher restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs. during 2011 and 2010, our advanced materials segment recorded
restructuring, impairment and plant closing charges (credits) of $20 million and $(2) million, respectively. for more information concerning restructuring activities, see "note 11.
restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs" to our consolidated financial statements. 

textile effects  

the decrease in revenues in our textile effects segment for 2011 compared to 2010 was due to lower sales volumes, partially offset by
higher average selling prices. sales volumes decreased due to weak retail demand and customer manufacturing constraints. average selling prices increased primarily from the strength of major
international currencies against the u.s. dollar. the decrease in segment ebitda was primarily due to higher restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs, lower sales volumes and the negative
foreign currency impact of a stronger swiss franc against the u.s. dollar on our manufacturing and selling, general and administrative costs. during 2011 and 2010, our textile effects segment recorded
restructuring, impairment and plant closing charges of $135 and $15 million, respectively. for more information concerning restructuring activities, see "note 11. restructuring,
impairment and plant closing costs" to our consolidated financial statements. 


pigments  

the increase in revenues in our pigments segment for 2011 compared to 2010 was due to higher average selling prices partially offset by
lower sales volumes. average selling prices increased in all regions of the world driven principally by higher raw materials costs and stronger overall market demand during the first half of 2011.
sales volumes decreased primarily due to decreased global demand in the last quarter of 2011, particularly in the asia-pacific, africa, middle east and latin america regions. the increase
in segment ebitda was primarily due to higher margins, partially offset by higher manufacturing and selling, general and administrative costs. 


corporate and other—huntsman corporation  

corporate and other includes unallocated corporate overhead, unallocated foreign exchange gains and losses, last-in
first-out ("lifo") inventory valuation reserve adjustments, loss on early extinguishment of debt, unallocated restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs and nonoperating income and
expense. for 2011, ebitda from corporate and other increased by $148 million to a loss of $236 million from a loss of $384 million for 2010. the increase in ebitda from corporate
and other for 2011 resulted primarily from a decrease in loss on early extinguishment of debt of $176 million ($7 million of losses in 2011 compared to $183 million of losses in
2010), an increase in treasury gains of $7 million ($11 million in gains in 2011 compared to $4 million in gains in 2010), a decrease in restructuring costs of $3 million
($2 million in losses in 2011 compared to $5 million in losses in 2010), a decrease in merger-related expenses of $4 million and an increase in the extraordinary gain on the
textile effects acquisition of $5 million ($4 million gain in 2011 compared to $1 million loss in 2010), and was partially offset by a $32 million
increase in legal settlements ($40 million loss in 2011 compared to $8 million loss in 2010), a $4 million increase in lifo inventory 

69




 

table of contents

valuation
expense ($22 million of expense in 2011 compared to $18 million of expense in 2010) and a $5 million loss during 2011 in benzene purchases, raw material purchased to
supply our polyurethanes and performance products businesses. for more information regarding the loss on early extinguishment of debt, see "note 14. debt—redemption of notes and
loss on early extinguishment of debt" to our consolidated financial statements. for more information regarding the extraordinary gain associated with the textile effects acquisition, see
"note 3. business combinations and dispositions—textile effects acquisition" to our consolidated financial statements. 

corporate and other—huntsman international  

corporate and other includes unallocated corporate overhead, unallocated foreign exchange gains and losses, lifo inventory valuation
reserve adjustments, loss on early extinguishment of debt, unallocated restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs, nonoperating income and expense and gains and losses on the disposition of
corporate assets. for 2011, ebitda from corporate and other decreased by $12 million to a loss of $236 million from a loss of $224 million for 2010. the decrease in ebitda from
corporate and other for 2011 resulted primarily from a $32 million increase in legal settlements ($40 million loss in 2011 compared to $8 million loss in 2010), a
$4 million increase in lifo inventory valuation expense ($22 million of expense in 2011 compared to $18 million of expense in 2010), a $5 million loss during 2011 in
benzene purchases, raw material purchased to supply our polyurethanes and performance products businesses, and a $10 million decrease in operating income due to the sale of corporate assets to
huntsman corporation in 2010, and was partially offset by a decrease in loss on early extinguishment of debt of $30 million ($7 million of losses in 2011 compared to $37 million
of losses in 2010), an increase in treasury gains of $7 million ($11 million in gains in 2011 compared to $4 million in gains in 2010), a decrease in restructuring costs of
$3 million ($2 million in losses in 2011 compared to $5 million in losses in 2010) and an increase in the extraordinary gain on the textile effects acquisition of
$5 million ($4 million gain in 2011 compared to $1 million loss in 2010). for more information regarding the loss on early extinguishment of debt, see "note 14.
debt—redemption of notes and loss on early extinguishment of debt" to our consolidated financial statements. for more information regarding extraordinary gain associated with the textile
effects acquisition, see "note 3. business combinations and dispositions—textile effects acquisition" to our consolidated financial statements. 


discontinued operations  

the operating results of our former polymers, base chemicals and australian styrenics businesses are classified as discontinued
operations, and, accordingly, the revenues of these businesses are excluded from revenues for all periods presented. the ebitda of these former businesses are included in discontinued operations for
all periods presented. the income (loss) from discontinued operations represents the operating results, legal costs, partial fire insurance settlement gains and related litigation costs, and
restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs and gain (loss) on disposal with respect to our former businesses. during 2010, we recognized a $110 million pretax gain in connection with the
final settlement of our insurance claims related to the 2006 fire at our former port arthur, texas plant, offset in part by related income taxes, legal and other costs. for more information, see
"note 25. discontinued operations" to our consolidated financial statements. 

year ended december 31, 2010 compared with year ended december 31, 2009  

for the year ended december 31, 2010, net income attributable to huntsman corporation was $27 million on revenues of
$9,250 million, compared with net income attributable to huntsman corporation of $114 million on revenues of $7,665 million for 2009. for the year ended december 31, 2010,
net income attributable to huntsman international llc was $180 million on revenues of $9,250 million, compared with net loss attributable to huntsman international llc of
$410 million on 

70




 

table of contents

revenues
of $7,665 million for 2009. the decrease of $87 million in net income attributable to huntsman corporation and the increase of $590 million in net income attributable to
huntsman international llc was the result of the following items:



•revenues for 2010 increased by $1,585 million, or 21%, as compared with 2009 due principally to higher average
selling prices and higher sales volumes in all our segments. see "—segment analysis" below. 
•our gross profit and the gross profit of huntsman international for 2010 increased by $383 million each, or 36% and
35%, respectively as compared with 2009, resulting from higher gross margins in all of our segments except polyurethanes. see "—segment analysis" below.  
•our operating expenses and the operating expenses of huntsman international for 2010 increased by $45 million and
$40 million, or 5% and 4%, respectively, as compared with 2009 due primarily to a $14 million increase in foreign currency transaction losses, $8 million of expenses related to
legal settlements, $6 million of additional research and development expenditures, and higher selling, general and administrative expenses. 
•restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs for 2010 decreased to $29 million from $88 million in
2009. for more information concerning restructuring activities, see "note 11. restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs" to our consolidated financial statements.  
•our net interest expense for 2010 decreased by $9 million, or 4%, as compared with 2009, resulting primarily from a
$12 million reduction in interest expense recognized in 2010 related to the ineffective portion of a cross currency swap and lower average outstanding debt balances, offset in part by higher
interest expense associated with our accounts receivable securitization programs ("a/r programs"). the net interest expense of huntsman international for 2010 increased by $8 million, or 3%, as
compared with 2009, resulting primarily from higher interest expense associated with our a/r programs, offset by a $12 million reduction in interest expense recognized in 2010 related to the
ineffective portion of a cross currency swap. for more information concerning the cross currency swap, see "note 15. derivative instruments and hedging activities—foreign exchange
rate risk" to our consolidated financial statements. upon the adoption of new accounting guidance in 2010, transfers of our accounts receivable under our a/r programs no longer met the criteria for
derecognition. accordingly, the amounts outstanding under our a/r programs are accounted for as secured borrowings beginning january 1, 2010. for more information, see "note 14. debt" to
our consolidated financial statements. 
•equity income of investment in unconsolidated affiliates for 2010 increased to $24 million from $3 million
in 2009. during 2010, we recorded a non-recurring $18 million credit to equity income of investment in unconsolidated affiliates to appropriately reflect our investment in the
sasol-huntsman joint venture. for more information, see "note 6. investment in unconsolidated affiliates" to our consolidated financial statements.  
•for the year ended december 31, 2010, we recorded a loss on early extinguishment of debt of $183 million,
and huntsman international recorded a loss on early extinguishment of debt of $37 million. for the year ended december 31, 2009, we and huntsman international each recorded a loss on
early extinguishment of debt of $21 million. for more information see "note 14. debt—redemption of notes and loss on early extinguishment of debt" to our consolidated
financial statements. 
•expenses associated with the terminated merger and related litigation in 2010 consisted primarily of $3 million of
bonuses paid to certain members of the board of directors, upon the recommendation of an independent committee of the board of directors, for their efforts in connection with the litigation with
hexion and apollo following the terminated merger. income 

71




 

table of contents




associated
with the terminated merger and related litigation for 2009 consisted primarily of an $868 million gain related to the settlement agreement reached in our litigation with the banks
that had entered into a commitment letter to provide funding for the hexion merger (the "texas bank litigation settlement agreement"), offset in part by litigation-related fees and employee retention
bonuses. for more information, see "note 24. (expenses) income associated with the terminated merger and related litigation" to our consolidated financial statements. 



•our income tax expense decreased by $415 million to an expense of $29 million for 2010 as compared with an
expense of $444 million for 2009. huntsman international's income tax expense decreased by $119 million to an expense of $40 million for 2010 as compared with an expense of
$159 million for 2009. our and huntsman international's tax obligations are affected by the mix of income and losses in the tax jurisdictions in which we operate. other than pre-tax
earnings, our income tax expense for 2010 as compared with 2009 was primarily impacted by the following: 2010 tax benefits associated with the release of valuation allowances of $20 million as
compared to 2009 establishment of valuation allowances of $149 million; 2010 tax benefits of $4 million compared to the 2009 tax benefits of $38 million related to recognizing a
tax benefit for operating losses in certain jurisdictions with valuation allowances and current other comprehensive income; and 2010 tax expense of $43 million related to non-tax
deductible payments on the portion of the loss on early extinguishment of debt resulting from the redemption of convertible notes issued on december 23, 2008 in an aggregate amount of
$250 million (the "convertible notes") treated as equity for tax purposes. other than pre-tax earnings, huntsman international's income tax expense for 2010 as compared to 2009 was
primarily impacted by the following: 2010 tax benefits associated with the release of valuation allowances of $20 million as compared to the 2009 establishment of valuation allowances of
$159 million; and 2010 tax benefits of $4 million compared to the 2009 tax benefit of $39 million related to recognizing a tax benefit for operating losses in certain
jurisdictions with valuation allowances and current other comprehensive income. for further information concerning taxes, see "note 18. income taxes" to our consolidated financial statements.  
•income from discontinued operations, net of tax, for 2010 was $42 million as compared to a loss of
$19 million in 2009. this increase resulted principally from a $110 million pretax gain from the final settlement of our insurance claims related to the 2006 fire at our former port
arthur, texas plant and a pretax gain of $7 million from the settlement of insurance claims related to the 2005 gulf coast storms, offset in part by related income taxes, legal and other costs
and by a $19 million loss from the recognition of cumulative currency translation losses upon the substantial liquidation of our former australian styrenics business. see "note 25.
discontinued operations" to our consolidated financial statements. 
•during 2010, we recorded an extraordinary loss on the acquisition of a business, net of tax, of $1 million
resulting from the settlement of contingent purchase price consideration related to the textile effects acquisition offset in part by the reimbursement by ciba of certain costs pursuant to the
acquisition agreements. during 2009, we recorded an extraordinary gain on the acquisition of a business, net of tax, of $6 million related principally to the reversal of accruals for certain
employee termination costs recorded in connection with the textile effects acquisition that were no longer deemed necessary and a reimbursement by ciba of certain costs pursuant to the acquisition
agreements. for more information, see "note 3. business combinations and dispositions—textile effects acquisition" to our consolidated financial statements. 

72




 

table of contents

the
following table sets forth the revenues and ebitda for each of our operating segments (dollars in millions): 


year ended december 31, 2010 compared to year ended december 31, 2009  
 





















 
 
year ended
december 31, 
 
 
 


 
 
percent
change 
 


 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


revenues
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


polyurethanes
 
$
3,605
 
$
3,005
 
 
20
%


performance products
 
 
2,659
 
 
2,090
 
 
27
%


advanced materials
 
 
1,244
 
 
1,059
 
 
17
%


textile effects
 
 
787
 
 
691
 
 
14
%


pigments
 
 
1,213
 
 
960
 
 
26
%


eliminations
 
 
(258
)
 
(140
)
 
84
%


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
$
9,250
 
$
7,665
 
 
21
%


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


huntsman corporation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


segment ebitda
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


polyurethanes
 
$
319
 
$
388
 
 
(18
)%


performance products
 
 
363
 
 
246
 
 
48
%


advanced materials
 
 
143
 
 
59
 
 
142
%


textile effects
 
 
1
 
 
(64
)
 
nm
 


pigments
 
 
205
 
 
(25
)
 
nm
 


corporate and other
 
 
(384
)
 
651
 
 
nm
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


subtotal
 
 
647
 
 
1,255
 
 
(48
)%


discontinued operations
 
 
53
 
 
(97
)
 
nm
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
$
700
 
$
1,158
 
 
(40
)%


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


huntsman international
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


segment ebitda
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


polyurethanes
 
$
319
 
$
388
 
 
(18
)%


performance products
 
 
363
 
 
246
 
 
48
%


advanced materials
 
 
143
 
 
59
 
 
142
%


textile effects
 
 
1
 
 
(64
)
 
nm
 


pigments
 
 
205
 
 
(25
)
 
nm
 


corporate and other
 
 
(224
)
 
(178
)
 
26
%


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


subtotal
 
 
807
 
 
426
 
 
89
%


discontinued operations
 
 
53
 
 
(97
)
 
nm
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
$
860
 
$
329
 
 
161
%


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
73




 

table of contents


 
























 
 
year ended december 31, 2010 vs. 2009 
 


 
 
average selling
price(1) 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
local
currency 
 
foreign
currency
translation
impact 
 
mix &
other 
 
sales
volumes(1) 
 


period-over-period increase (decrease)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


polyurethanes
 
 
6
%
 
(1
)%
 
11
%
 
4
%


performance products
 
 
10
%
 
—
 
 
(4
)%
 
21
%


advanced materials
 
 
3
%
 
(1
)%
 
4
%
 
11
%


textile effects
 
 
7
%
 
1
%
 
—
 
 
6
%


pigments
 
 
12
%
 
(2
)%
 
(1
)%
 
17
%


total company
 
 
11
%
 
(1
)%
 
—
 
 
11
%







 

 
(1)excludes
revenues and sales volumes from tolling arrangements and byproducts. 

nm—not
meaningful 
 

polyurethanes  

the increase in revenues in our polyurethanes segment for 2010 as compared to 2009 was primarily due to higher average selling prices
for mdi products and mtbe and higher mdi product sales volumes. average selling prices for mdi products and mtbe increased primarily in response to higher raw material costs. mdi products sales
volumes were higher as demand in all major markets continued to recover from the worldwide economic downturn. po/mtbe sales volumes decreased due to the planned 60 day maintenance outage at our
port neches, texas po/mtbe facility in the first quarter of 2010. the decrease in segment ebitda was primarily due to the estimated $40 million impact of the planned maintenance outage at our
port neches, texas facility and lower mtbe margins, offset in part by improvement in mdi sales volumes and margins. 

performance products  

for 2010, our performance products segment revenues increased due to higher sales volumes and higher average selling prices when
compared to 2009. sales volumes increased primarily due to higher demand across almost all product groups and as a result of additional sales of a portion of our ethylene glycol production previously
produced under tolling arrangements. average selling prices increased across almost all product groups principally in response to continued strong market demand and higher raw material costs,
partially offset by the strength of the u.s. dollar against major european currencies. the increase in segment ebitda was primarily due to higher sales volumes and higher margins, partially offset by
higher plant expenses and the impact of shut downs during the first quarter of 2010 at our port neches, texas ethylene and ethylene oxide units which resulted in higher costs of approximately
$11 million. in addition, during 2010, we recorded a non-recurring $18 million credit to equity income of investment in unconsolidated affiliates to appropriately reflect our
investment in the sasol-huntsman joint venture. 

advanced materials  

the increase in revenues in our advanced materials segment for 2010 compared to 2009 was due to higher sales volumes and higher average
selling prices. sales volumes increased in all markets primarily due to the worldwide economic recovery. average selling prices increased in our base resins business primarily in response to higher
raw material costs, offset in part by lower average selling prices in our specialty components and formulations markets, primarily as a result of changes in our product mix and competitive market
pressures. the increase in segment ebitda was primarily due to higher 

74




 

table of contents

sales
volumes and margins and lower restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs, partially offset by higher manufacturing costs. during 2010 and 2009, our advanced materials segment recorded
restructuring, impairment and plant closing (credits) charges of $(2) million and $13 million, respectively. for more information concerning restructuring activities, see "note 11.
restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs" to our consolidated financial statements. 

textile effects  

the increase in revenues in our textile effects segment for 2010 compared to 2009 was due to higher average selling prices and higher
sales volumes. average selling prices increased primarily due to favorable changes in product mix. sales volumes increased across all business lines due to the economic recovery in all regions of the
world. the increase in segment ebitda was primarily due to higher sales volumes and higher contribution margins, partially offset by higher restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs. during
2010 and 2009, our textile effects segment recorded restructuring, impairment and plant closing charges of $15 million and $6 million, respectively. for more information concerning
restructuring activities, see "note 11. restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs" to our consolidated financial statements. 


pigments  

the increase in revenues in our pigments segment for 2010 compared to 2009 was due to higher average selling prices and higher sales
volumes. average selling prices increased primarily as a result of higher selling prices in all regions of the world. sales volumes increased primarily due to demand recovery in all regions of the
world as a result of the worldwide economic recovery. the increase in segment ebitda was primarily due to higher sales volumes, higher contribution margins and lower restructuring, impairment and
plant closing costs. during 2010 and 2009, our pigments segment recorded restructuring, impairment and plant closing charges of $8 million and $53 million, respectively. for more
information concerning restructuring activities, see "note 11. restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs" to our consolidated financial statements. 

corporate and other—huntsman corporation  

corporate and other includes unallocated corporate overhead, unallocated foreign exchange gains and losses, lifo inventory valuation
reserve adjustments, loss on early extinguishment of debt, (expenses) income associated with the terminated merger and related litigation, unallocated restructuring, impairment and plant closing
costs, extraordinary gain (loss) on the acquisition of a business, loss on accounts receivable securitization program (for periods prior to 2010) and non-operating income and expense. for
2010, ebitda from corporate and other items decreased by $1,035 million to a loss of $384 million from earnings of $651 million for 2009. the decrease in ebitda from corporate and
other for 2010 resulted primarily from a gain of $835 million in 2009 related to the texas bank litigation settlement agreement. for more information, see "note 24. (expenses) income
associated with the terminated merger and related litigation" to our consolidated financial statements. additionally, the decrease in ebitda from corporate and other was also attributable to an
increase in loss on early extinguishment of debt of $162 million ($183 million of losses in 2010 compared to $21 million of losses in 2009), an increase of lifo inventory
valuation expense of $32 million ($18 million of expense in 2010 compared to $14 million of income in 2009), a $13 million decrease in unallocated foreign exchange gains
($3 million in gains in 2010 compared to $16 million in gains in 2009), a $7 million decrease in the extraordinary gain on the textile effects acquisition ($1 million loss
in 2010 compared to $6 million gain in 2009), and an increase in legal settlements of $8 million. for more information regarding the loss on early extinguishment of debt, see
"note 14. debt—redemption of notes and loss on early extinguishment of debt" to our consolidated financial statements. for more information regarding extraordinary gain associated
with 

75




 

table of contents

the
textile effects acquisition, see "note 3. business combinations and dispositions—textile effects acquisition" to our consolidated financial statements. the decrease in ebitda
was partially offset by a $23 million reduction in loss on accounts receivable securitization program. upon the adoption of new accounting guidance in 2010, transfers of accounts receivable
under our a/r programs no longer met the criteria for derecognition. accordingly, the amounts outstanding under our a/r programs are accounted for as secured borrowings beginning january 1,
2010. for more information, see "note 14. debt—a/r programs" to our consolidated financial statements. 


corporate and other—huntsman international  

corporate and other includes unallocated corporate overhead, unallocated foreign exchange gains and losses, lifo inventory valuation
reserve adjustments, loss on early
extinguishment of debt, unallocated restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs, extraordinary gain (loss) on the acquisition of a business, loss on accounts receivable securitization program
(for periods prior to 2010) and non-operating income and expense. for 2010, ebitda from corporate and other items decreased by $46 million to a loss of $224 million from a
loss of $178 million for 2009. the decrease in ebitda from corporate and other for 2010 resulted primarily from an increase of lifo inventory valuation expense of $32 million
($18 million of expense in 2010 compared to $14 million of income in 2009), a $13 million decrease in unallocated foreign exchange gains ($3 million in gains in 2010
compared to $16 million in gains in 2009), an increase in loss on early extinguishment of debt of $16 million ($37 million of losses in 2010 compared to $21 million of
losses in 2009), and an increase in legal settlements of $8 million. for more information regarding the loss on early extinguishment of debt, see "note 14. debt—redemption of
notes and loss on early extinguishment of debt" to our consolidated financial statements. the decrease to ebitda was partially offset by a $23 million reduction in loss on accounts receivable
securitization program. upon the adoption of new accounting guidance in 2010, transfers of accounts receivable under our a/r programs no longer met the criteria for derecognition. accordingly, the
amounts outstanding under our a/r programs are accounted for as secured borrowings beginning january 1, 2010. for more information, see "note 14. debt—a/r programs" to our
consolidated financial statements. 

discontinued operations  

the operating results of our former polymers, base chemicals and australian styrenics businesses are classified as discontinued
operations, and, accordingly, the revenues of these businesses are excluded from revenues for all periods presented. the results of these former businesses are included in discontinued operations for
all periods presented. 

income
from discontinued operations, net of tax, for 2010 was $42 million as compared to a loss of $19 million in 2009. the increase in income from discontinued operations
resulted principally from a $110 million pretax gain recognized in the second quarter of 2010 in connection with the final settlement of our insurance claims related to the 2006 fire at our
former port arthur, texas plant and a pretax gain of $7 million from the settlement of insurance claims related to the 2005 gulf coast storms, offset in part by related income taxes, legal and
other costs and by a $19 million loss from the recognition of cumulative currency translation losses upon the substantial liquidation of our former australian styrenics business. see
"note 25. discontinued operations" to our consolidated financial statements. 

liquidity and capital resources  

the following is a discussion of our liquidity and capital resources and generally does not include separate information with respect
to huntsman international in accordance with general instruction i of form 10-k. 

76






 




































 
table of contents 

cash flows for year ended december 31, 2011 compared to the year ended december 31, 2010  

net cash provided by (used in) operating activities for 2011 and 2010 was $365 million and $(58) million, respectively.
the increase in cash provided by operating activities during 2011 compared to 2010 was primarily attributable to an increase in operating income as described in "—results of operations"
above and to a $420 million favorable variance in operating assets and liabilities for 2011 as compared with 2010. upon the adoption of new accounting guidance on january 1, 2010, sales
of accounts receivable under our a/r programs no longer meet the criteria for derecognition and off-balance sheet treatment. accordingly, the amounts outstanding under our a/r programs are
accounted for as secured borrowings and were included on our balance sheet. as a result of the adoption of this new guidance, accounts receivable increased by $254 million and a corresponding
increase in cash used in operating activities was reflected in the statement of cash flows for 2010. 

net
cash used in investing activities for 2011 and 2010 was $280 million and $182 million, respectively. during 2011 and 2010, we paid $327 million and
$202 million, respectively, for capital expenditures, net of reimbursements. during 2011, we paid $34 million, net of cash acquired, for the laffans acquisition and the acquisition of an
mdi-based polyurethanes systems house in istanbul, turkey.
on april 1, 2011, we began consolidating the sasol-huntsman joint venture and assumed its cash balance of $28 million. during 2011, we sold businesses and assets for $48 million,
including the sale of our former stereolithography resin and digitalis® machine manufacturing businesses for $41 million. during 2011, we received $32 million of dividends
from our unconsolidated joint ventures, louisiana pigment company, l.p. and basf huntsman shanghai isocyanate investment b.v. and made investments in louisiana pigment
company, l.p. of $26 million. during 2010, we received proceeds of $110 million from the settlement of our insurance claims related to the 2006 fire at our former port arthur,
texas facility, $34 million of which was reflected in the statement of cash flows as investing activities. 


net
cash used in financing activities for 2011 and 2010 was $490 million and $543 million, respectively. this decrease in net cash used in financing activities was
primarily due to higher net repayments of debt in 2010 as compared to 2011 and a $154 million reduction in call premiums paid related to early extinguishment of debt in 2010, offset in part by
the repurchase of $50 million of common stock in 2011 and by the on-balance sheet treatment of our a/r programs in 2010. for more information regarding the call premiums paid, see
"note 14. debt—redemption of notes and loss on early extinguishment of debt" to our consolidated financial statements. for more information regarding the repurchase of common stock,
see "note 21. huntsman corporation stockholders' equity—share repurchase program" to our consolidated financial statements. 

cash flows for year ended december 31, 2010 compared to the year ended december 31, 2009  

net cash (used in) provided by operating activities for 2010 and 2009 was $(58) million and $1,104 million, respectively. the
increase in cash used in operating activities was primarily attributable to the 2009 settlement proceeds received in connection with the texas bank litigation settlement agreement and by a
$1,014 million unfavorable variance in operating assets and liabilities for 2010 as compared with 2009, offset in part by an increase in operating income as described in "—results
of operations" above. upon the adoption of new accounting guidance on january 1, 2010, transfers of accounts receivable under our a/r programs no longer met the criteria for derecognition and
off-balance sheet treatment. accordingly, the amounts outstanding under our a/r programs are accounted for as secured borrowings and are now on balance sheet. as a result of the adoption
of this new guidance, accounts receivable increased by $254 million and a corresponding increase in cash used in operating activities was reflected in the statement of cash flows for 2010. 

net
cash used in investing activities for 2010 and 2009 was $182 million and $205 million, respectively. during 2010 and 2009, we paid $202 million and
$189 million, respectively, for capital 

77




 

table of contents

expenditures,
net of reimbursements. this increase in net capital expenditures was largely attributable to higher 2010 spending on maintenance and environmental projects, offset in part by
$34 million of reimbursed capital expenditures in 2010. during 2010, we received proceeds of $110 million from the settlement of our insurance claims related to the 2006 fire at our
former port arthur, texas plant, $34 million of which was reflected in the investing activities section of the statement of cash flows as a reimbursement of capital expenditures. in connection
with the consolidation of arabian amines company in the third quarter of 2010, we assumed $14 million of cash. for more information, see "note 6. investment in unconsolidated affiliates"
and "note 7. variable interest entities" to our consolidated financial statements. during 2009, we paid $31 million for the acquisition of the baroda division of metrochem industries
limited. 

net
cash (used in) provided by financing activities for 2010 was $(543) million as compared with $184 million in 2009. this increase in net cash used in financing
activities was primarily due to higher net prepayment of debt in 2010 as compared to 2009 and the resulting call premiums paid in association with these prepayments, partially offset by the issuance
of new senior subordinated notes and the on balance sheet treatment of our a/r programs. in addition, in 2009 we issued $600 million aggregate principal amount of 5.5% senior notes due 2016
(the "2016 senior notes") and obtained a $500 million term loan ("term loan c") in connection with the texas bank litigation settlement agreement. for more information, see "note 14.
debt" to our consolidated financial statements. 

changes in financial condition  

the following information summarizes our working capital (dollars in millions): 
 






























 
 
december 31,
2011 
 
less:
laffans acquisition
and consolidation of
sasol-huntsman(1) 
 
subtotal 
 
december 31,
2010 
 
(decrease)
increase 
 
percent
change 
 


cash and cash equivalents
 
$
554
 
$
(28
)
$
526
 
$
966
 
$
(440
)
 
(46
)%


restricted cash
 
 
8
 
 
—
 
 
8
 
 
7
 
 
1
 
 
14
%


accounts receivable, net
 
 
1,534
 
 
(37
)
 
1,497
 
 
1,428
 
 
69
 
 
5
%


inventories
 
 
1,539
 
 
(8
)
 
1,531
 
 
1,396
 
 
135
 
 
10
%


prepaid expenses
 
 
46
 
 
—
 
 
46
 
 
46
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


deferred income taxes
 
 
20
 
 
—
 
 
20
 
 
1
 
 
19
 
 
nm
 


other current assets
 
 
245
 
 
(2
)
 
243
 
 
164
 
 
79
 
 
48
%


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total current assets
 
 
3,946
 
 
(75
)
 
3,871
 
 
4,008
 
 
(137
)
 
(3
)%


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


accounts payable
 
 
912
 
 
(22
)
 
890
 
 
887
 
 
3
 
 
—
 


accrued liabilities
 
 
695
 
 
(2
)
 
693
 
 
628
 
 
65
 
 
10
%


deferred income taxes
 
 
7
 
 
—
 
 
7
 
 
19
 
 
(12
)
 
(63
)%


current portion of debt
 
 
212
 
 
(3
)
 
209
 
 
519
 
 
(310
)
 
(60
)%


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total current liabilities
 
 
1,826
 
 
(27
)
 
1,799
 
 
2,053
 
 
(254
)
 
(12
)%


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


working capital
 
$
2,120
 
$
(48
)
$
2,072
 
$
1,955
 
$
117
 
 
6
%


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 







 

 
(1)represents
opening balance sheet amounts related to the laffans acquisition and the consolidation of the sasol-huntsman joint venture. 


excluding
the effects of the laffans acquisition and the consolidation of the sasol-huntsman joint venture, our working capital increased by $117 million as a result of the net impact of the
following significant changes:


•the decrease in cash and cash equivalents of $440 million resulted from the matters identified in the consolidated
statements of cash flows. 

 
78




 

table of contents
 
 

•accounts receivable increased by $69 million mainly due higher sales prices and volumes, offset in part by the
impact of foreign currency translation. 
•inventories increased by $135 million mainly due to higher raw material costs and higher inventory volumes
necessary to support increased sales. 
•other current assets increased by $79 million mainly due to higher bank accepted drafts with maturities greater
than 90 days at receipt and higher taxes receivable. 
•the increase in accounts payable of $3 million was primarily due to higher inventory costs, offset by the impact of
foreign currency translation. 
•the increase in accrued liabilities of $65 million resulted primarily from higher legal accruals, higher
restructuring accruals, higher deferred revenue and higher income taxes payable. 
•current portion of debt decreased by $310 million due to the refinancing of our a/r programs in april 2011 which
resulted in the reclassification of $223 million of debt classified as current portion of debt at december 31, 2010 to long-term debt in 2011. in addition, we prepaid
$100 million of our 7.375% senior subordinated notes due 2015 on january 18, 2011; this amount was classified as current portion of debt at december 31, 2010. 

 
direct and subsidiary debt  

huntsman corporation's direct debt and guarantee obligations consist of the following: guarantees of certain debt of hps (our chinese
mdi joint venture); a guarantee of certain debt of our australian subsidiaries; and certain indebtedness incurred from time to time to finance certain insurance premiums. 

substantially
all of our other debt, including the facilities described below, has been incurred by our subsidiaries (primarily huntsman international); such subsidiary debt is
nonrecourse to us and we have no contractual obligation to fund our subsidiaries' respective operations. 


senior credit facilities  

as of december 31, 2011, our senior secured credit facilities ("senior credit facilities") consisted of our revolving facility
("revolving facility"), our term loan b facility ("term loan b"), our term loan c and our extended term loan b facility ("extended term loan b") as follows (dollars in millions): 
 


























facility



 
 
committed
amount 
 
principal
outstanding 
 
carrying
value 
 
interest rate(2) 
 
maturity 
 


revolving facility
 
$
300
 
$
—
 
$
—
(1)
usd libor plus 3.00%
 
 
2014
(3)


term loan b
 
 
na
 
$
652
 
$
652
 
usd libor plus 1.50%
 
 
2014
(3)


term loan c
 
 
na
 
$
427
 
$
394
 
usd libor plus 2.25%
 
 
2016
(3)


extended term loan b
 
 
na
 
$
650
 
$
650
 
usd libor plus 2.50%
 
 
2017
(3)







 

 
(1)we
had no borrowings outstanding under our revolving facility; we had approximately $20 million (u.s. dollar equivalents) of letters of credit and
bank guarantees issued and outstanding under our revolving facility.
(2)the
applicable interest rate of the senior credit facilities is subject to certain secured leverage ratio thresholds. as of december 31, 2011, the
weighted average interest rate on our outstanding balances under the senior credit facilities was approximately 2%. 
 
79




 

table of contents
 

(3)the
maturity of the extended term loan b will accelerate if we do not repay, refinance or have a minimum level of liquidity available to enable us to
refinance or repay our outstanding 5.50% senior notes due 2016 at least three months prior to the maturity date of such notes. 
 
our
obligations under the senior credit facilities are guaranteed by our guarantor subsidiaries, which consist of substantially all of our domestic subsidiaries and certain of our
foreign subsidiaries, and are secured by a first priority lien on substantially all of our domestic property, plant and equipment, the stock of all of our material domestic subsidiaries and certain
foreign subsidiaries and pledges of intercompany notes between certain of our subsidiaries. 

on
march 7, 2011, huntsman international entered into a sixth amendment to its credit agreement. the amendment, among other things, extended $650 million of aggregate
principal of term loan b to a stated maturity of april 2017. as noted in the table above, after the amendment, as of december 31, 2011, we have $652 million outstanding on term loan b
with maturity of april 2014 and $650 million outstanding on extended term loan b with a maturity of april 2017. the amendment increased the interest rate margin with respect to extended term
loan b by 1.0%. extended term loan b will amortize in an amount equal to 1.0% of the principal amount, payable annually commencing on march 31, 2012. the amendment also grants huntsman
international the right to request an extension of the remaining principal balance of term loan b to the stated maturity date of extended term loan b. 

during
2010, we took the following actions with respect to our senior credit facilities:



•on march 9, huntsman international entered into the fifth amendment to the credit agreement which replaced certain
agent banks, extended the stated maturity of the revolving facility and amended certain other terms. 
•on april 26, we prepaid $124 million on term loan b and $40 million on term loan c with cash
accumulated in prior periods. we incurred a loss on early extinguishment of debt of $5 million. 
•on june 22, we prepaid $83 million on term loan b and $27 million on term loan c with proceeds from
the final settlement of insurance claims. we incurred a loss on early extinguishment of debt of $2 million. 
•we paid the annual scheduled repayment of $16 million on term loan b and $5 million on term loan c. 


a/r programs  

our a/r programs are structured so that we grant a participating undivided interest in certain of our trade receivables to a u.s.
special purpose entity ("u.s. spe") and a european special purpose entity ("eu spe"). we retain the servicing rights and a retained interest in the securitized receivables. information regarding the
a/r programs was as follows (monetary amounts in millions): 
 



















december 31, 2011 


facility



 
 
maturity 
 
maximum funding
availability(1) 
 
amount
outstanding 
 
interest rate(2)(3) 


u.s. a/r program
 
april 2014
 
$250
 
$90(4)
 
applicable rate plus 1.50% - 1.65%


eu a/r program
 
april 2014
 
€225
(approximately
$291)
 
€114
(approximately
$147)
 
applicable rate plus 2.0%



 
80




 

table of contents


 



















december 31, 2010 


facility



 
 
maturity 
 
maximum funding
availability(1) 
 
amount
outstanding 
 
interest rate(2)(3) 


u.s. a/r program
 
october 2012
 
$125
 
$27.5
 
usd libor rate plus 3.75%


u.s. a/r program
 
october 2011
 
$125
 
$27.5
 
cp rate plus 3.50%


eu a/r program
 
october 2011
 
€225
(approximately
$297)
 
€139
(approximately
$183)
 
gbp libor rate, usd libor rate or euribor rate plus 3.75%







 

 
(1)the
amount of actual availability under the a/r programs may be lower based on the level of eligible receivables sold, changes in the credit ratings of our
customers, customer concentration levels, and certain characteristics of the accounts receivable being transferred, as defined in the applicable agreements.
(2)each
interest rate is defined in the applicable agreements. in addition, the u.s. spe and the eu spe are obligated to pay unused commitment fees to
the lenders based on the amount of each lender's commitment.
(3)applicable
rate for the u.s. a/r program is defined by the lender as either usd libor or cp rate. applicable rate for our european a/r program ("eu a/r
program") is either gbp libor, usd libor or euribor.
(4)as
of december 31, 2011, we had approximately $4 million (u.s. dollar equivalents) of letters of credit issued and outstanding under our u.s.
a/r program ("u.s. a/r program"). 
 
on
april 15, 2011, huntsman international entered into an amendment to the eu a/r program. this amendment, among other things, extended the scheduled commitment
termination date of the program to april 2014, added an additional lender to the program and reduced the applicable margin on borrowings to 2.0%. 

on
april 18, 2011, huntsman international entered into an amendment to the u.s. a/r program. this amendment, among other things, extended the scheduled commitment termination date
of the program to april 2014, added an additional lender to the program and reduced the applicable margin on borrowings to a range of 1.50% to 1.65%. 

receivables
transferred under the a/r programs qualified as sales through december 31, 2009. upon adoption of new accounting guidance in 2010, transfers of accounts receivable
under our a/r programs no longer met the criteria for derecognition. accordingly, the amounts outstanding under our a/r programs are accounted for as secured borrowings as of january 1, 2010.
during 2009, we recorded a loss on the off-balance sheet accounts receivable securitization program of $23 million. 


as
of december 31, 2011 and december 31, 2010, $633 million and $552 million respectively, of accounts receivable were pledged as collateral under the a/r
programs. 

notes  


as of december 31, 2011, we had outstanding the following notes (monetary amounts in millions): 
 


















notes



 
 
maturity 
 
interest rate 
 
amount outstanding 


senior notes
 
june 2016
 
 
5.500%
(1)
$600 ($472 carrying value)


senior subordinated notes
 
march 2021
 
 
8.625
%
$530 ($543 carrying value)


senior subordinated notes
 
march 2020
 
 
8.625
%
$350


senior subordinated notes
 
january 2015
 
 
7.500
%
€  64 (approximately $83)







 

 
(1)the
effective interest rate at issuance was 11.73%. 
 
81






 



































  
table of contents 

our notes are governed by indentures which impose certain limitations on huntsman international, including among other things limitations on the incurrence of
debt, distributions, certain restricted payments, asset sales, and affiliate transactions. the notes are unsecured obligations and are guaranteed by certain subsidiaries named as guarantors. 


redemption of notes and loss on early extinguishment of debt  

during the years ended december 31, 2011 and 2010, we redeemed or repurchased the following notes (monetary amounts in
millions): 
 





















date of redemption



 
 
notes 
 
principal amount of
notes redeemed 
 
amount paid
(excluding accrued
interest) 
 
loss on early
extinguishment
of debt 
 


three months ended december 31, 2011
 
6.875% senior subordinated notes due 2013
 
€70 (approximately $94)
 
€71 (approximately $96)
 
$
2
 


three months ended september 30, 2011
 
6.875% senior subordinated notes due 2013
 
€14 (approximately $19)
 
€14 (approximately $19)
 
$

—
 


three months ended september 30, 2011
 
7.5% senior subordinated notes due 2015
 
€12 (approximately $17)
 
€12 (approximately $17)
 
$

—
 


july 25, 2011
 
7.375% senior subordinated notes due 2015
 
$75
 
$77
 
$

2
 


january 18, 2011
 
7.375% senior subordinated notes due 2015
 
$100
 
$102
 
$

3
 


november 29, 2010
 
7.875% senior subordinated notes due 2014
 
$88
 
$92
 
$

3
 


november 26, 2010
 
7.875% senior subordinated notes due 2014
 
$100
 
$104
 
$

4
 


october 12, 2010
 
7.875% senior subordinated notes due 2014
 
$159
 
$165
 
$

7
 


september 27, 2010
 
6.875% senior subordinated notes due 2013
 
€132 (approximately $177)
 
€137 (approximately $183)
 
$

7
 


march 17, 2010
 
6.875% senior subordinated notes due 2013
 
€184 (approximately $253)
 
€189 (approximately $259)
 
$

7
 


march 17, 2010
 
7.50% senior subordinated notes due 2015
 
€59 (approximately $81)
 
€59 (approximately $81)
 
$

2
 


january 11, 2010(1)
 
7.00% convertible notes due 2018
 
$250
 
$382
 
$

146
 







 

 
(1)the
convertible notes due 2018 were issued to apollo in december 2008 as part of a settlement agreement with apollo. these convertible notes, which would
have matured on december 23, 2018, bore interest at the rate of 7% per year and were convertible into approximately 31.8 million shares of our common stock at any time by the holders. 
 
82




 

table of contents

for the year ended december 31, 2011, we and huntsman international recorded a loss on early extinguishment of debt of $7 million.
for the year ended december 31, 2010, in connection with redemptions described in the table above, we recorded a loss on early extinguishment of debt of $176 million, and huntsman
international recorded a loss on early extinguishment of debt of $30 million. as noted in "—senior credit facilities" above, we and huntsman international also recognized a
$7 million loss on early extinguishment of debt in 2010 on the prepayment of $274 million
of term loans. for the year ended december 31, 2009, we and huntsman international recorded a loss on early extinguishment of debt of $21 million each. 

variable interest entity debt  

on april 1, 2011 we began consolidating sasol-huntsman which was previously accounted for under the equity method. see
"note 7. variable interest entities." sasol-huntsman has a facility agreement for a €77 million (approximately $100 million) term loan facility and a
€5 million (approximately $6 million) revolving facility. as of december 31, 2011, sasol-huntsman had no borrowings under the revolving facility and had
€73 million (approximately $95 million) outstanding under the term loan facility. the facility will be repaid over semiannual installments, with the final repayment
scheduled for december 2018. obligations under the facility agreement are secured by, among other things, first priority right on the property, plant and equipment of sasol-huntsman. 


as
of december 31, 2011, arabian amines company had $186 million outstanding under its loan commitments and debt financing arrangements which consisted of the
following:



•a loan facility from saudi industrial development fund (the "sidf facility") with sar 482 million (approximately
$129 million) outstanding. repayment of the loan is to be made in semiannual installments that are scheduled to begin in 2012, with final maturity in 2018. the loan is secured by a mortgage
over the fixed assets of the project and is 100% guaranteed by the zamil group, our 50% joint venture partner. 
•a multipurpose islamic term facility with $57 million outstanding. this facility is scheduled to be repaid in
semiannual installments, with final maturity in 2022. 


other debt  

during the year ended december 31, 2011, hps repaid $4 million and rmb 151 million (approximately
$24 million) of term loans and working capital loans under its secured
facilities. in addition, during the year ended december 31, 2011, hps refinanced rmb 38 million (approximately $6 million) in working capital loans and borrowed an additional rmb
145 million (approximately $23 million) in working capital loans with maturity in 2014. the interest rate on these facilities is libor plus 0.48% for u.s. dollar borrowings and
approximately 90% of the peoples bank of china rate for rmb borrowings. as of december 31, 2011, hps had $12 million and rmb 474 million (approximately $75 million) term
loan and working capital borrowings under these secured facilities. as of december 31, 2011, the interest rate was approximately 1% for u.s. dollar borrowings and 6% for rmb borrowings. we have
guaranteed certain of these loans. 

as
of december 31, 2011, hps also had rmb 499 million (approximately $79 million) outstanding under a loan facility for working capital loans and discounting
commercial drafts with recourse, which is classified as current portion of debt on the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. interest is calculated using a peoples bank of china rate plus the
applicable margin. the all-in rate as of december 31, 2011 was approximately 6%. 

as
of december 31, 2011, our australian subsidiary has a$26 million (approximately $26 million) outstanding under its credit facility. the credit facility is
comprised of a revolving facility with a$14 million (approximately $14 million) outstanding and a term facility with a$12 million 

83




 

table of contents

(approximately
$12 million) outstanding. on september 1, 2011, our australian subsidiary entered into an amendment with the lender to modify certain terms of the credit facility. 

during
the third quarter of 2011, we incurred other debt related to the financing of our insurance premiums in connection with our annual renewal in july 2011. as of december 31,
2011, the outstanding amount of financed insurance premiums was $15 million, all of which was classified as current portion of debt on the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. 

note payable from huntsman international to huntsman corporation  

as of december 31, 2011, we had a loan of $535 million to our subsidiary, huntsman international (the "intercompany
note"). the intercompany note is unsecured and $100 million of the outstanding amount is classified as current as of december 31, 2011 on the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. as
of december 31, 2011, under the terms of the intercompany note, huntsman international promises to pay us interest on the unpaid principal
amount at a rate per annum based on the previous monthly average borrowing rate obtained under our u.s. a/r program, less 10 basis points (provided that the rate shall not exceed an amount that is 25
basis points less than the monthly average borrowing rate obtained for the u.s. libor-based borrowings under our revolving facility). 

compliance with covenants  

we believe that we are in compliance with the covenants contained in the agreements governing our material debt instruments, including
our senior credit facilities, our a/r programs and our notes. 

our
material financing arrangements contain certain covenants with which we must comply. a failure to comply with a covenant could result in a default under a financing arrangement if
not waived or amended. a default under these material financing arrangements generally allows debt holders the option to declare the underlying debt obligations immediately due and payable. 

furthermore,
certain of our material financing arrangements contain cross default and cross acceleration provisions under which a failure to comply with the covenants in one financing
arrangement may result in an event of default under another financing arrangement. 

our
senior credit facilities are subject to a single financial covenant (the "leverage covenant") which applies only to the revolving facility and is tested at the huntsman international
level. the leverage covenant is applicable only if borrowings, letters of credit or guarantees are outstanding under the revolving facility (cash collateralized letters of credit or guarantees are not
deemed outstanding). the leverage covenant is a net senior secured leverage ratio covenant which requires that huntsman international's ratio of senior secured debt to ebitda (as defined in the
applicable agreement) is not more than 3.75 to 1. 

if
in the future huntsman international failed to comply with the leverage covenant, then we may not have access to liquidity under our revolving facility. if huntsman international
failed to comply with the leverage covenant at a time when we had uncollateralized loans or letters of credit outstanding under the revolving facility, huntsman international would be in default under
the senior credit facilities, and, unless huntsman international obtained a waiver or forbearance with respect to such default (as to which we can provide no assurance), huntsman international could
be required to pay off the balance of the senior credit facilities in full, and we may not have further access to such facilities. 

the
agreements governing our a/r programs also contain certain receivable performance metrics. any material failure to meet the applicable a/r programs' metrics in the future could lead
to an early termination event under the a/r programs, which could require us to cease our use of such facilities, prohibiting us from additional borrowings against our receivables or, at the
discretion of the lenders, requiring that we repay the a/r programs in full. an early termination event under the a/r programs 

84




 

table of contents

would
also constitute an event of default under our senior credit facilities, which could require us to pay off the balance of the senior credit facilities in full and could result in the loss of our
senior credit facilities. 

short-term and long-term liquidity  

we depend upon our cash, credit facilities, a/r programs and other debt instruments to provide liquidity for our operations and working
capital needs. as of december 31, 2011, we had $1,043 million of combined cash and unused borrowing capacity, consisting of $562 million in cash and restricted cash,
$280 million in availability under our revolving facility, and $201 million in availability under our a/r programs. as of december 31, 2011, we had approximately
$209 million of cash and cash equivalents, including restricted cash, held by our foreign subsidiaries, including our variable interest entities. our intent is to use cash held in these foreign
subsidiaries to fund our local operations, but should we need to repatriate this cash by way of dividends we could be subject to certain adverse tax consequences. for more information, see
"note 18. income taxes" to our consolidated financial statements. cash held by certain foreign subsidiaries, including our variable interest entities ("vies"), may also be subject to legal
restrictions, including those arising from the interests of our partners, which could limit the amounts available for repatriation. our liquidity can be significantly impacted by various factors. the
following matters had, or are expected to have, a significant impact on our liquidity:



•our accounts receivable and inventory, net of accounts payable, increased by approximately $258 million during
2011, as reflected in our consolidated statement of cash flows. we expect volatility in our working capital components to continue. 
•during 2012, we expect to spend approximately $425 million on capital expenditures. we expect to fund this spending
with cash provided by operations. 
•on september 8, 2009, we announced the closure of our styrenics facility located at west footscray, australia. we
ceased the australian styrenics operations during the first quarter of 2010. as of december 31, 2011, we had restructuring accruals of $6 million and environmental remediation accruals
of $32 million. we can provide no assurance that the eventual environmental remediation costs will not be materially different from our current estimate. the plant closure and environmental
remediation costs are expected to be funded as they are incurred over the next several years. 
•during 2011, we made contributions to our pension and postretirement benefit plans of $168 million. during 2012, we
expect to contribute an additional amount of approximately $154 million to these plans. 
•during 2011, huntsman international redeemed $175 million of its 7.375% senior subordinated notes due 2015,
€84 million (approximately $113 million) of its 6.875% senior subordinated notes due 2013 and €12 million (approximately $17 million) of its
7.50% senior subordinated notes due 2015. 
•during 2011, our advanced materials segment commenced with the reorganization of our global structure and relocation of
our divisional headquarters from basel, switzerland to the woodlands, texas. during 2011, our advanced materials segment recorded net charges of $20 million primarily related to this activity.
we expect to incur additional charges of $1 million through december 31, 2012 related to the relocation of our divisional headquarters from basel, switzerland to the woodlands, texas. on
september 27, 2011, we announced plans to implement a significant restructuring of our textile effects business, including a closure of our production facilities and business support offices in
basel, switzerland. in connection with this plan during 2011, we recorded a charge of $62 million for workforce reduction and a noncash $53 million charge for the impairment of
long-lived assets at our basel, switzerland 

85




 

table of contents




manufacturing
facility. in addition, we expect to accrue additional restructuring and plant closing costs of approximately $25 million through 2014. we expect to spend approximately
$20 million for capital expenditures related to this restructuring program over the next several years. 



•on august 5, 2011, we announced that our board of directors has authorized our company to repurchase up to
$100 million in shares of our common stock. during 2011, we acquired approximately four million shares of our outstanding common stock for approximately $50 million under the repurchase
program. as of december 31, 2011, there remained approximately $50 million of the amount authorized under the program that could be used for stock repurchases. these repurchases may be
commenced or suspended from time to time without prior notice. 


as
of december 31, 2011, we had $212 million classified as current portion of debt which consists of certain scheduled term payments and various short-term
facilities including an hps borrowing facility in china with $79 million outstanding, our australian credit facilities with $18 million classified as current, our scheduled senior credit
facilities amortization payments in 2012 totaling $18 million, and certain other short term facilities and scheduled amortization payments totaling $97 million. although we cannot
provide assurances, we intend to renew or extend the majority of these short-term facilities in the current period. 

contractual obligations and commercial commitments  


our obligations under long-term debt (including the current portion), lease agreements and other contractual commitments as
of december 31, 2011 are summarized below (dollars in millions): 
 



























 
 
2012 
 
2013 - 2014 
 
2015 - 2016 
 
after 2016 
 
total 
 


long-term debt, including current portion
 
$
212
 
$
1,059
 
$
1,032
 
$
1,639
 
$
3,942
 


interest(1)
 
 
228
 
 
428
 
 
346
 
 
309
 
 
1,311
 


operating leases(5)
 
 
77
 
 
135
 
 
95
 
 
148
 
 
455
 


purchase commitments(2)
 
 
685
 
 
325
 
 
163
 
 
94
 
 
1,267
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total(3)(4)
 
$
1,202
 
$
1,947
 
$
1,636
 
$
2,190
 
$
6,975
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 







 

 
(1)interest
calculated using interest rates as of december 31, 2011 and contractual maturity dates assuming no refinancing or extension of debt
instruments.
(2)we
have various purchase commitments extending through 2023 for materials, supplies and services entered into in the ordinary course of business. included
in the purchase commitments table above are contracts which require minimum volume purchases that extend beyond one year or are renewable annually and have been renewed for 2010. certain contracts
allow for changes in minimum required purchase volumes in the event of a temporary or permanent shutdown of a facility. to the extent the contract requires a minimum notice period, such notice period
has been included in the above table. the contractual purchase price for substantially all of these contracts is variable based upon market prices, subject to annual negotiations. we have estimated
our contractual obligations by using the terms of our 2009 pricing for each contract. we also have a limited number of contracts which require a minimum payment even if no volume is purchased. we
believe that all of our purchase obligations will be utilized in our normal operations. 
 
86




 

table of contents
 


(3)totals
do not include commitments pertaining to our pension and other postretirement obligations. our estimated future contributions to our pension and
postretirement plans are as follows (dollars in millions): 
 

























 
 
2012 
 
2013 - 2014 
 
2015 - 2016 
 
5-year
average
annual 
 


pension plans
 
$
142
 
$
266
 
$
274
 
$
89
 


other postretirement obligations
 
 
12
 
 
24
 
 
22
 
 
11
 



 

 
(4)the
above table does not reflect expected tax payments and unrecognized tax benefits due to the inability to make reasonably reliable estimates of the
timing and amount of payments. for additional discussion on unrecognized tax benefits, see "note 18. income taxes" to our consolidated financial statement.
(5)future
minimum lease payments have not been reduced by minimum sublease rentals of $28 million due in the future under noncancelable subleases. 
 
off-balance sheet arrangements  

receivables securitization  

for a discussion of our former off-balance sheet a/r programs, see "note 14. debt—a/r programs" to our
consolidated financial statements. beginning in 2010, receivables transferred into the a/r programs no longer met criteria for derecognition and amounts outstanding are accounted for as secured
borrowings. 

restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs  

for a discussion of restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs, see "note 11. restructuring, impairment and plant closing
costs" to our consolidated financial statements. 


legal proceedings  

for a discussion of legal proceedings, see "note 19. commitments and contingencies—legal matters" to our
consolidated financial statements. 

environmental, health and safety matters  

for a discussion of environmental, health and safety matters, see "note 20. environmental, health and safety matters" to our
consolidated financial statements. 


recently issued accounting pronouncements

for
a discussion of recently issued accounting pronouncements, see "note 2. summary of significant accounting policies—recently issued
accounting pronouncements" to our consolidated financial statements. 

87






 









































table of contents 

critical accounting policies

the
preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the u.s. requires management to
make judgments, estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts in the consolidated financial statements. our significant accounting policies are summarized in "note 2. summary of
significant accounting policies" to our consolidated financial statements. summarized below are our critical accounting policies: 

employee benefit programs  

we sponsor several contributory and non-contributory defined benefit plans, covering employees primarily in the u.s., the
u.k., the netherlands, belgium and switzerland, but also covering employees in a number of other countries. we fund the material plans through trust arrangements (or local equivalents) where the
assets are held separately from us.
we also sponsor unfunded postretirement plans which provide medical and life insurance benefits covering certain employees in the u.s. and canada. amounts recorded in the consolidated financial
statements are recorded based upon actuarial valuations performed by various independent actuaries. inherent in these valuations are numerous assumptions regarding expected return on assets, discount
rates, compensation increases, mortality rates and health care costs trends. these assumptions are disclosed in "note 17. employee benefit plans" to our consolidated financial statements. 

management,
with the advice of its actuaries, uses judgment to make assumptions on which our employee pension and postretirement benefit plan obligations and expenses are based. the
effect of a 1% change in three key assumptions is summarized as follows (dollars in millions): 
 


















assumptions



 
 
statement of
operations(1) 
 
balance sheet
impact(2) 
 


discount rate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


—1% increase
 
$
(28
)
$
(420
)


—1% decrease
 
 
34
 
 
486
 


expected return on assets
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


—1% increase
 
 
(26
)
 
—
 


—1% decrease
 
 
26
 
 
—
 


rate of compensation increase
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


—1% increase
 
 
18
 
 
103
 


—1% decrease
 
 
(17
)
 
(98
)







 

 
(1)estimated
increase (decrease) on 2011 net periodic benefit cost
(2)estimated
increase (decrease) on december 31, 2011 pension and postretirement liabilities and accumulated other comprehensive (loss) income 
 
environmental reserves  

environmental remediation costs for our facilities are accrued when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount
can be reasonably estimated. estimates of environmental reserves require evaluating government regulation, available technology, site-specific information and remediation alternatives. we
accrue an amount equal to our best estimate of the costs to remediate based upon the available information. the extent of environmental damage may not be fully known and the processes and costs of
remediation may change as new information is obtained or technology for remediation is improved. our process for estimating the expected cost for remediation considers the information available,
technology that can be utilized and estimates of the extent of environmental damage. adjustments to our estimates are made periodically based upon additional information 

88




 

table of contents

received
as remediation progresses. for further information, see "note 20. environmental, health and safety matters" to our consolidated financial statements. 

fair value  

pursuant to the texas bank litigation settlement agreement, on june 22, 2009, huntsman international entered into an amendment
of its senior credit facilities that provided for term loan c with a $500 million principal amount, and huntsman international also issued $600 million aggregate principal amount of 2016
senior notes. in accordance with accounting guidance regarding fair value measurements, we recorded the term loan c and the 2016 senior notes in our accounting records at fair values of
$439 million and $425 million, respectively, upon initial recognition in june 2009. 

we
primarily used the income approach to determine the fair value of these instruments. fair value represents the present value of estimated future cash flows calculated using interest
rates that were available to us for issuance of debt with similar terms, adjusted for differences in remaining maturity using relevant debt yield curves. 


management
used judgment with respect to assumptions used in estimating the fair values of the term loan c and the 2016 senior notes. the effect of the following changes in certain key
assumptions is summarized as follows (dollars in millions): 
 















assumptions



 
 
balance sheet
impact(1) 
 


effective market yield
 
 
 
 


—1% increase
 
$
(45
)


—1% decrease
 
 
47
 







 

 
(1)estimated
increase (decrease) to june 2009 fair values of term loan c and 2016 senior notes 
 
we
primarily used the income approach to determine the fair value of the convertible notes. fair value is based on the present value of estimated future cash flows, calculated using
management's best estimates of key assumptions including relevant interest rates, expected share volatility, dividend yields, and the probabilities associated with certain features of the convertible
notes. we also used the market approach to assess comparables and corroborate the fair value determined using the income approach. 

goodwill  

we test our goodwill for impairment at least annually (at the beginning of the third quarter) and when events and circumstances change
that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount. goodwill has been assigned to reporting units for purposes of impairment testing. currently,
substantially all of our goodwill balance relates to our advanced materials reporting unit. 


fair
value is estimated using the market approach, as well as the income approach based on discounted cash flow projections. the estimated fair values of our reporting units are
dependent on several significant assumptions including, among others, market information, operating results, earnings projections and anticipated future cash flows. 

we
tested goodwill for impairment at the beginning of the third quarter of 2011 as part of the annual impairment testing procedures and determined that no goodwill impairment existed.
our most recent fair value determination resulted in an amount that exceeded the carrying amount of our advanced materials reporting unit by a substantial margin. the goodwill associated with our
maleic anhydride reporting unit within our performance products division was recorded at fair value during 

89




 

table of contents

the
second quarter of 2011 when sasol-huntsman was first consolidated, approximately three months before our annual impairment testing took place. as such, no detailed impairment analysis was
performed for the goodwill in this reporting unit at the beginning of the third quarter of 2011. given the profitability in our maleic anhydride business, we believe that if a detailed analysis had
been performed it would not have resulted in an impairment of this goodwill. 

income taxes  

we use the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. deferred income taxes reflect the net tax effects of temporary
differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial and tax reporting purposes. we evaluate deferred tax assets to determine whether it is more likely than not that they
will be realized. valuation allowances are reviewed on a tax jurisdiction basis to analyze whether there is sufficient positive or negative
evidence to support a change in judgment about the realizability of the related deferred tax assets for each jurisdiction. these conclusions require significant judgment. in evaluating the objective
evidence that historical results provide, we consider the cyclicality of businesses and cumulative income or losses during the applicable period. cumulative losses incurred over the period limits our
ability to consider other subjective evidence such as our projections for the future changes in expected future income in applicable jurisdictions could affect the realization of deferred tax assets
in those jurisdictions. as of december 31, 2011, we had total valuation allowances of $756 million. please see "note 18. income taxes" to our consolidated financial statements for
more information regarding our valuation allowances. 

for
non-u.s. entities that were not treated as branches for u.s. tax purposes, the company does not provide for income taxes on the undistributed earnings of these
subsidiaries as earnings are reinvested and, in the opinion of management, will continue to be reinvested indefinitely. the undistributed earnings of foreign subsidiaries that are deemed to be
permanently invested were approximately $226 million at december 31, 2011. it is not practicable to determine the unrecognized deferred tax liability on those earnings. we have material
inter-company debt obligations owed by our non-u.s. subsidiaries to the u.s. the company does not intend to repatriate earnings to the u.s. via dividend based on estimates of future
domestic cash generation and our ability to return cash to the u.s. through payments of inter-company debt owned by our non-u.s. subsidiaries to the u.s. to the extent that cash is
required in the u.s., rather than repatriate earnings to the u.s. via dividend we will utilize our inter-company debt. if any earnings were repatriated via dividend, the company would need to accrue
and pay taxes on the distributions. 

accounting
for uncertainty in income taxes prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or
expected to be taken in a tax return. the application of income tax law is inherently complex. we are required to determine if an income tax position meets the criteria of
more-likely-than-not to be realized based on the merits of the position under tax law, in order to recognize an income tax benefit. this requires us to make many
assumptions and judgments regarding the merits of income tax positions and the application of income tax law. additionally, if a tax position meets the recognition criteria of
more-likely-than-not we are required to make judgments and assumptions to measure the amount of the tax benefits to recognize based on the probability of the amount
of tax benefits that would be realized if the tax position was challenged by the taxing authorities. interpretations and guidance surrounding income tax laws and regulations change over time. as a
consequence, changes in assumptions and judgments can materially affect amounts recognized in the consolidated financial statements. 

90




 

table of contents

inventories  

inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market, with cost determined using lifo, first-in first-out, and
average cost methods for different components of inventory. market is determined based on net realizable value for finished goods inventories and replacement cost for raw materials and
work-in-process inventories. in periods of declines in the selling prices of our finished products, inventory carrying values may exceed the net realizable value upon sale,
resulting in a lower of cost or market charge. we evaluate the need for a lower of cost or market adjustment to inventories based on the period-end selling prices of our finished products. 

long-lived assets  

the useful lives of our property, plant and equipment are estimated based upon our historical experience, engineering estimates and
industry information and are reviewed when economic events indicate that we may not be able to recover the carrying value of the assets. the estimated lives of our property range from 3 to
33 years and depreciation is recorded on the straight-line method. inherent in our estimates of useful lives is the assumption that periodic maintenance and an appropriate level of
annual capital expenditures will be performed. without on-going capital improvements and maintenance, the productivity and cost efficiency declines and the useful lives of our assets would
be shorter. 

management
uses judgment to estimate the useful lives of our long-lived assets. at december 31, 2011, if the estimated useful lives of our property, plant and
equipment had either been one year greater or one year less than their recorded lives, then depreciation expense for 2011 would have been approximately $29 million less or $33 million
greater, respectively. 

we
are required to evaluate the carrying value of our plant assets whenever events indicate that such carrying value may not be recoverable in the future or when management's plans
change regarding those assets, such as idling or closing a plant. we evaluate impairment by comparing undiscounted cash flows of the related asset groups that are largely independent of the cash flows
of other asset groups to their carrying values. key assumptions in determining the future cash flows include the useful life, technology, competitive pressures, raw material pricing and regulations.
in connection with our asset evaluation policy, we reviewed all of our long-lived assets for indicators that the carrying value may not be recoverable. with the exception of the
long-lived assets at our textile effects basel, switzerland manufacturing facility, we determined that such indicators did not exist during the year ended december 31, 2011. in
connection with the announced plans to significantly restructure the textile effects business, we recorded a charge of $53 million for the impairment of long-lived assets at our
basel, switzerland manufacturing facility in the third quarter of
2011. for further discussion of this impairment charge, see "note 11. restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs" to our consolidated financial statements. 

restructuring and plant closing costs  

we have recorded restructuring charges in recent periods in connection with closing certain plant locations, workforce reductions and
other cost savings programs primarily in our textile effects, advanced materials and pigments segments. these charges are recorded when management has committed to a plan and incurred a liability
related to the plan. estimates for plant closing costs include the write-off of the carrying value of the plant, any necessary environmental and/or regulatory costs, contract termination
and demolition costs. estimates for workforce reductions and other costs savings are recorded based upon estimates of the number of positions to be terminated, termination benefits to be provided and
other information, as necessary. management evaluates the estimates on a quarterly basis and will adjust the reserve when information indicates that the estimate is above or 

91




 

table of contents

below
the currently recorded estimate. for further discussion of our restructuring activities, see "note 11. restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs" to our consolidated financial
statements. 

revenue recognition  

we generate substantially all of our revenues through sales in the open market and long-term supply agreements. we
recognize revenue when it is realized or realizable and earned. revenue for product sales is recognized when a sales arrangement exists, risk and title to the product transfer to the customer,
collectability is reasonably assured and pricing is fixed or determinable. the transfer of risk and title to the product to the customer usually occurs at the time shipment is made. 

revenue
arrangements that contain multiple deliverables, which relate primarily to the licensing of technology, are evaluated in accordance with asc 605-25,  revenue recognition—multiple-element arrangements, to determine whether the arrangements
should be divided into separate units of accounting and how the arrangement consideration should be measured and allocated among the separate units of accounting. 

variable interest entities—primary beneficiary  

we evaluate each of our variable interest entities on an on-going basis to determine whether we are the primary
beneficiary. management assesses, on an on-going basis, the nature of our relationship to the variable interest entity, including the amount of control that we exercise over the entity as
well as the amount of risk that we bear and rewards we receive in regards to the entity, to determine if we are the primary beneficiary of that variable interest entity. management judgment is
required to assess whether these attributes are significant. we consolidate all variable interest entities for which we have concluded that we are the primary beneficiary.  

 
item 7a.    quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk        

we are exposed to market risks, such as changes in interest rates, foreign exchange rates and commodity pricing risks. from time to
time, we enter into transactions, including transactions involving derivative instruments, to manage certain of these exposures. we also hedge our net investment in certain european operations.
changes in the fair value of the hedge in the net investment of certain european operations are recorded in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss). 

interest rate risks

through
our borrowing activities, we are exposed to interest rate risk. such risk arises due to the structure of our debt portfolio, including the duration of
the portfolio and the mix of fixed and floating interest rates. actions taken to reduce interest rate risk include managing the mix and rate characteristics of various interest bearing liabilities, as
well as entering into interest rate derivative instruments. 

from
time to time, we may purchase interest rate swaps and/or interest rate collars to reduce the impact of changes in interest rates on our floating-rate
long-term debt. under interest rate swaps, we agree with other parties to exchange, at specified intervals, the difference between fixed-rate and floating-rate
interest amounts calculated by reference to an agreed notional principal amount. the collars entitle us to receive from the counterparties (major banks) the amounts, if any, by which our interest
payments on certain of our floating-rate borrowings exceed a certain rate, and require us to pay to the counterparties (major banks) the amount, if any, by which our interest payments on
certain of our floating-rate borrowings are less than a certain rate. 

on
december 9, 2009, we entered into a five-year interest rate contract to hedge the variability caused by monthly changes in cash flow due to associated changes in
libor under our senior credit 

92




 

table of contents

facilities.
the notional value of the contract is $50 million, and it has been designated as a cash flow hedge. the effective portion of the changes in the fair value of the swap was recorded
in other comprehensive loss. we will pay a fixed 2.6% on the hedge and receive the one-month libor rate. as of december 31, 2011 and 2010, the fair value of the hedge was $(3)
million and $(2) million respectively, and was recorded in other noncurrent liabilities. 

on
january 19, 2010, we entered into an additional five-year interest rate contract to hedge the variability caused by monthly changes in cash flow due to associated
changes in libor under our senior credit facilities. the notional value of the contract is $50 million, and it has been designated as a cash flow hedge. the effective portion of the changes in
the fair value of the swap was recorded as other comprehensive loss. we will pay a fixed 2.8% on the hedge and receive the one-month libor rate. as of december 31, 2011 and 2010,
the fair value of the hedge was $(3) million and $(2) million respectively and was recorded in other noncurrent liabilities. 

on
september 1, 2011, we entered into a $50 million forward interest rate contract that will begin in december 2014 with maturity in april 2017 and a $50 million
forward interest rate contract that will begin in january 2015 with maturity in april 2017. these two forward contracts are to hedge the variability caused by monthly changes in cash flow due to
associated changes in libor under our senior credit facilities once our existing interest rate hedges mature. these swaps are designated as a cash flow hedges and the effective portion of the changes
in the fair value of the swaps were recorded in other comprehensive income. both interest rate contracts will pay a fixed 2.5% on the hedge and receive the one-month libor rate once the
contracts begin in 2014 and 2015, respectively. as of december 31, 2011, the combined fair value of these two hedges was $(1) million and was recorded in other noncurrent liabilities on the
accompanying condensed consolidated balance sheets. 

in
2009, sasol-huntsman entered into derivative transactions to hedge the variable interest rate associated with its local credit facility. these derivative rate hedges include a
floating to fixed interest rate contract providing sasol-huntsman with euribor interest payments for a fixed payment of 3.62% and a cap for future periods with a strike price of 3.62%. in connection
with the consolidation of sasol-huntsman as of april 1, 2011, the interest rate contract is now included in our consolidated results. see "note 7. variable interest entities." the
notional amount of the hedge as of december 31, 2011 was €51 million (approximately $66 million) and the derivative transactions do not qualify for hedge
accounting. as of december 31, 2011, the fair value of this hedge was €(3) million (approximately $3 million) and was recorded in other noncurrent liabilities on the
accompanying consolidated balance sheets. for 2011, we recorded interest expense of €2 million (approximately $2 million) due to changes in the fair value of the swap. 

beginning
in 2009, arabian amines company entered into a 12-year floating to fixed interest rate contract providing for a receipt of libor interest payments for a fixed payment of 5.02%.
in connection with the consolidation of arabian amines company as of july 1, 2010, the interest rate contract is now included in our consolidated results. see "note 7. variable interest
entities." the notional amount of the swap as of december 31, 2011 was $38 million, and the interest rate contract is not designated as a cash flow hedge. as of december 31, 2011
and 2010, the fair value of the swap was $(6) million and $(5) million respectively and was recorded as other noncurrent liabilities on the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. for 2011 and 2010,
we recorded additional (reduction of) interest expense of $1 million and $(1) million respectively due to changes in fair value of the swap. 


for
the years ended december 31, 2011 and 2010, the changes in accumulated other comprehensive (loss) income associated with these cash flow hedging activities was approximately
$4 million and $5 million, respectively. 

during
2012, accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) of nil is expected to be reclassified to earnings. the actual amount that will be reclassified to earnings over the next twelve
months may vary from this amount due to changing market conditions. we would be exposed to credit losses in the event of nonperformance by a counterparty to our derivative financial instruments. we
anticipate, however, that the counterparties will be able to fully satisfy their obligations under the contracts. market risk arises from changes in interest rates. 

93






 



































 




table of contents 

foreign exchange rate risk  

our cash flows and earnings are subject to fluctuations due to exchange rate variation. our revenues and expenses are denominated in
various currencies. we enter into foreign currency derivative instruments to minimize the short-term impact of movements in foreign currency rates. where practicable, we generally net
multicurrency cash balances among our subsidiaries to help reduce exposure to foreign currency exchange rates. certain other exposures may be managed from time to time through financial market
transactions, principally through the purchase of spot or forward foreign exchange contracts (generally with maturities of three months or less). we do not hedge our currency exposures in a manner
that would eliminate the effect of changes in exchange rates on our cash flows and earnings. as of december 31, 2011 and 2010, we had approximately $263 million and $183 million
notional amount (in u.s. dollar equivalents) outstanding, respectively, in foreign currency contracts with a term of approximately one month. 


in
conjunction with the issuance of our 8.625% senior subordinated notes due 2020, we entered into cross-currency interest rate contracts with three counterparties. on march 17,
2010, we made payments of $350 million to these counterparties and received €255 million from these counterparties, and on maturity (march 15, 2015) we are
required to pay € 255 million to these counterparties and will receive $350 million from these counterparties. on march 15 and
september 15 of each year, we will receive u.s. dollar interest payments of approximately $15 million (equivalent to an annual rate of 8.625%) and make interest payments of approximately
€11 million (equivalent to an annual rate of approximately 8.41%). this swap is designated as a hedge of net investment for financial reporting purposes. as of
december 31, 2011 and december 31, 2010, the fair value of this swap was $27 million and $19 million respectively and was recorded as noncurrent assets in our consolidated
balance sheet. for 2011 and 2010, the effective portion of the changes in the fair value of $8 million and $7 million respectively in other comprehensive income, and we recorded the
ineffective portion of nil and $12 million respectively as an (addition) reduction to interest expense. on july 15, 2010, we changed the method of assessing the effectiveness of this
hedge from the spot method to the forward method, which we believe will reduce the ineffective portion and lower volatility in interest expense in future periods. 

a
portion of our debt is denominated in euros. we also finance certain of our non-u.s. subsidiaries with intercompany loans that are, in many cases, denominated in currencies
other than the entities' functional currency. we manage the net foreign currency exposure created by this debt through various means, including cross-currency swaps, the designation of certain
intercompany loans as permanent loans because they are not expected to be repaid in the foreseeable future ("permanent loans") and the designation of certain debt and swaps as net investment hedges. 

foreign
currency transaction gains and losses on intercompany loans that are not designated as permanent loans are recorded in earnings. foreign currency transaction gains and losses on
intercompany loans that are designated as permanent loans are recorded in other comprehensive income. from time to time, we review such designation of intercompany loans. 


we
review our non-u.s. dollar denominated debt to determine the appropriate amounts designated as hedges. as of december 31, 2011, we have designated approximately
€319 million (approximately $412 million) of euro-denominated debt as a hedge of our net investment. for the years ended december 31, 2011, 2010 and
2009, the amount of (loss) gain recognized on the hedge of our net investment was $5 million, $34 million and $(5) million, respectively, and was recorded in other comprehensive income
(loss). as of december 31, 2011, we had approximately €1,162 million (approximately $1,503 million) in net euro assets. 

94




 

table of contents

commodity prices risk  

our exposure to changing commodity prices is somewhat limited since the majority of our raw materials are acquired at posted or market
related prices, and sales prices for many of our finished products are at market related prices which are largely set on a monthly or quarterly basis in line with industry practice. consequently, we
do not generally hedge our commodity exposures.  

 
item 8.    financial statements and supplementary data        

our consolidated financial statements required by this item are included on the pages immediately following the index to consolidated
financial statements appearing on page f-1.  

 
item 9.    changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure        


there have been no changes in our independent accountants, deloitte & touche llp, or disagreements with them on matters
of accounting or financial disclosure.  

 
item 9a.    controls and procedures        

evaluation of disclosure controls and procedures  

our management, with the participation of our chief executive officer and chief financial officer, has evaluated the effectiveness of
our disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) under the exchange act), as of december 31, 2011. based on this evaluation,
our chief executive officer and chief financial officer have concluded that, as of december 31, 2011, our disclosure controls and procedures were effective, in that they ensure that information
required to be disclosed by us in the reports that we file or submit under the exchange act is (1) recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in the sec's
rules and forms, and (2) accumulated and communicated to our management, including our chief executive officer and chief financial officer, as appropriate to allow timely decisions regarding
required disclosure. 

changes in internal control over financial reporting  

no changes to our internal control over financial reporting occurred during the quarter ended december 31, 2011 that have
materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting (as defined in rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) under the
exchange act). 

management's report on internal control over financial reporting  

management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting. our internal control
framework and processes for our company and huntsman international are designed to provide reasonable assurance to management, huntsman international's board of managers and our board of directors
regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of our consolidated financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the united states of
america. 

our
internal control over financial reporting for our company and huntsman international includes those policies and procedures that:



•pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and
dispositions of the assets of our company and huntsman international; 
•provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded properly to allow for the preparation of financial statements
in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, 

95




 


table of contents




and
that receipts and expenditures of our company and huntsman international are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of our company and huntsman
international; 



•provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use or disposition of
our assets that could have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements; and 
•provide reasonable assurance as to the detection of fraud. 


because
of its inherent limitations, a system of internal control over financial reporting can provide only reasonable assurance and may not prevent or detect misstatements. further,
because of changing conditions, effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting may vary over time. 

our
management assessed the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting for our company and huntsman international and concluded that, as of december 31, 2011,
such internal control is effective. in making this assessment, management used the criteria set forth by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission in  internal control—integrated
framework ("coso"). 


our
independent registered public accountants, deloitte & touche llp, with direct access to our board of directors through our audit committee, have audited the
consolidated financial statements prepared by our company and huntsman international and have issued attestation reports on internal control over financial reporting for our company and huntsman
international. 

96






 









































table of contents 

 
 
management's process to assess the effectiveness of  internal control over financial reporting

to
comply with the requirements of section 404 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002, we completed a comprehensive compliance process to evaluate our
internal control over financial reporting for our company and huntsman international. we involved employees at all levels of our company during 2011 in training, performing and evaluating our internal
controls. 

our
management's conclusion on the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting is based on a comprehensive evaluation and analysis of the five elements of coso. our
management considered information from multiple sources as the basis its conclusion—including self-assessments of the control activities within each work process, assessments
of division-level and entity-level controls and internal control attestations from key external service providers, as well as from key management. in addition, our internal control processes contain
self-monitoring mechanisms, and proactive steps are taken to correct deficiencies as they are identified. we also maintain an internal auditing program that independently assesses the
effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting within each of the five coso elements. 
 













/s/ peter r. huntsman




peter r. huntsman president and chief executive officer
 
/s/ j. kimo esplin




j. kimo esplin executive vice president and chief financial officer


/s/ l. russell healy




l. russell healy vice president and controller
 

 


february 16, 2012
 

 



 
97






 



































 




table of contents 

 
 
report of independent registered public accounting firm        

to
the board of directors and stockholders of
huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

we
have audited the internal control over financial reporting of huntsman corporation and subsidiaries (the "company") as of december 31, 2011, based on criteria established in  internal control—integrated
framework issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission. the company's
management is responsible for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, included in the
accompanying management's report on internal control over
financial reporting. our responsibility is to express an opinion on the company's internal control over financial reporting based on our audit. 


we
conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states). those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain reasonable assurance about whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects. our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal control
over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk, and
performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. we believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion. 


a
company's internal control over financial reporting is a process designed by, or under the supervision of, the company's principal executive and principal financial officers, or
persons performing similar functions, and effected by the company's board of directors, management, and other personnel to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting
and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. a company's internal control over financial reporting includes those
policies and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company;
(2) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that
receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding
prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company's assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements. 

because
of the inherent limitations of internal control over financial reporting, including the possibility of collusion or improper management override of controls, material
misstatements due to error or fraud may not be prevented or detected on a timely basis. also, projections of any evaluation of the effectiveness of the internal control over financial reporting to
future periods are subject to the risk that the controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate. 

in
our opinion, the company maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of december 31, 2011, based on the criteria established in  internal control—integrated
framework issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission. 

98




 

table of contents

we
have also audited, in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states), the consolidated financial statements and financial statement
schedules as of and for the year ended december 31, 2011 of the company and our report dated february 16, 2012 expressed an unqualified opinion on those financial statements and
financial statement schedules and included an explanatory paragraph regarding the company's application of new accounting guidance related to its method of accounting for transfers of accounts
receivable under the company's accounts receivable securitization programs, effective january 1, 2010. 

/s/
deloitte & touche llp 

houston,
texas
february 16, 2012 

99




 

table of contents

 
 
report of independent registered public accounting firm        

to
the board of managers and members of
huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

we
have audited the internal control over financial reporting of huntsman international llc and subsidiaries (the "company") as of december 31, 2011, based on criteria
established in internal control—integrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission. the
company's management is responsible for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting,
included in the accompanying management's report on internal control over financial reporting. our responsibility is to express an opinion on the company's internal control over financial reporting
based on our audit. 

we
conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states). those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain reasonable assurance about whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects. our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal control
over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk, and
performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. we believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion. 

a
company's internal control over financial reporting is a process designed by, or under the supervision of, the company's principal executive and principal financial officers, or
persons performing similar functions, and effected by the company's board of directors, management, and other personnel to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting
and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. a company's internal control over financial reporting includes those
policies and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company;
(2) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that
receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding
prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company's assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements. 


because
of the inherent limitations of internal control over financial reporting, including the possibility of collusion or improper management override of controls, material
misstatements due to error or fraud may not be prevented or detected on a timely basis. also, projections of any evaluation of the effectiveness of the internal control over financial reporting to
future periods are subject to the risk that the controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate. 

in
our opinion, the company maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of december 31, 2011, based on the criteria established in  internal control—integrated
framework issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission.
 

100




 

table of contents

we
have also audited, in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states), the consolidated financial statements and financial statement
schedule as of and for the year ended december 31, 2011 of the company and our report dated february 16, 2012 expressed an unqualified opinion on those financial statements and financial
statement schedule and included an explanatory paragraph regarding the company's application of new accounting guidance related to its method of accounting for transfers of accounts receivable under
the company's accounts receivable securitization programs, effective january 1, 2010. 

/s/
deloitte & touche llp 

houston,
texas
february 16, 2012 

101




 

table of contents

 
item 9b.    other information        

none. 

 
 
part iii        

 
item 10.    directors, executive officers and corporate governance        


information relating to our directors (including identification of our audit committee's financial expert(s)) and executive officers is
contained in the definitive proxy statement for our annual meeting of stockholders and is incorporated herein by reference. see also the information regarding executive officers of the registrant set
forth in part i under the caption "executive officers of the registrant" in reliance on general instruction g to form 10-k. 

code of ethics  

our company has adopted a code of ethics, as defined by item 406(b) of regulation s-k under the exchange act,
that applies to our principal executive officer, principal financial officer and principal accounting officer or controller. a copy of the code of ethics is posted on our website, at www.huntsman.com.
we intend to disclose any amendments to, or waivers from, our code of ethics on our website.  

 
item 11.    executive compensation        

information relating to executive compensation and our equity compensation plans is contained in the definitive proxy statement for our
annual meeting of stockholders and is incorporated herein by reference.  

 
item 12.    security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters        

information with respect to beneficial ownership of our common stock by each director and all directors and officers of our company as
a group is contained in the definitive proxy statement for our annual meeting of stockholders and is incorporated herein by reference. 


information
relating to any person who beneficially owns in excess of 5 percent of the total outstanding shares of our common stock is contained in the definitive proxy statement
for our annual meeting of stockholders and is incorporated herein by reference. 

information
with respect to compensation plans under which equity securities are authorized for issuance is contained in the definitive proxy statement for our annual meeting of
stockholders and is incorporated herein by reference.  

 
item 13.    certain relationships and related transactions, and director independence        


information with respect to certain relationships and related transactions is contained in the definitive proxy statement for our
annual meeting of stockholders and is incorporated herein by reference.  

 
item 14.    principal accountant fees and services        

information with respect to principal accountant fees and services, and the disclosure of the audit committee's
pre-approval policies and procedures are contained in the definitive proxy statement for our annual meeting of stockholders and are incorporated herein by reference. 

102






 



































 




table of contents 

 
 
part iv        


 
item 15.    exhibits and financial statement schedules        


(a)documents
filed with this report.
1.consolidated
financial statements: 


see
index to consolidated financial statements on page f-1 



2.financial
statement schedules: 


other
than as stated on the index to consolidated financial statements on page f-1 with respect to schedule i and schedule ii, financial statement schedules are
omitted because they are not required or are not applicable or the required information is shown in the financial statements or notes thereto.  



3.exhibits:



the
exhibits to this report are listed on the exhibit index below.  



(b)description
of exhibits. 
 
 
exhibit index        
 














number 
 
description 


 
3.1
 
second amended and restated certificate of incorporation of the company (incorporated by reference to exhibit 3.1 to our registration statement on form s-1/a filed on february 9, 2005)


 
  
 
 


 
3.2
 
third amended and restated bylaws of huntsman corporation effective march 24, 2010 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 3.1(i) to our current report on form 8-k filed on march 26, 2010)


 
  
 
 


 
4.1
 
indenture, dated as of december 17, 2004, among huntsman international llc, as issuer, the guarantors named therein and wells fargo bank, national association, as trustee, relating to the
73/8% senior subordinated notes due 2015 and the 71/2% senior subordinated notes due 2015 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.1 to huntsman international llc's current report on
form 8-k filed on december 23, 2004 (file no. 333-85141))


 
  
 
 


 
4.2
 
form of restricted 73/8% senior subordinated note denominated in dollars due 2015 (included as exhibit a-1 to exhibit 4.1)


 
  
 
 


 
4.3
 
form of restricted 71/2% senior subordinated note denominated in euros due 2015 (included as exhibit a-2 to exhibit 4.1)


 
  
 
 


 
4.4
 
form of unrestricted 73/8% senior subordinated note denominated in dollars due 2015 (included as exhibit a-3 to exhibit 4.1)


 
  
 
 


 
4.5
 
form of unrestricted 71/2% senior subordinated note denominated in euros due 2015 (included as exhibit a-4 to exhibit 4.1)


 
  
 
 


 
4.6
 
form of guarantee (included as exhibit e to exhibit 4.1)


 
  
 
 


 
4.7
 
registration rights agreement dated as of february 10, 2005, by and among the company and the stockholders signatory thereto (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to our current report on form 8-k
filed on february 16, 2005 (file no. 001-32427))


 


 
 



 
103




 

table of contents
 














number 
 
description 


 
4.8
 
form of stock certificate of huntsman corporation (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.68 to amendment no. 3 to our registration statement on form s-1 filed on february 8, 2005)


 
  
 
 


 
4.9
 
supplemental indenture dated august 16, 2005 to indenture dated as december 17, 2004 by and among huntsman international llc, the guarantors named therein, and wells fargo bank, national association (as
successor by consolidation to wells fargo bank minnesota, national association), as trustee, relating to huntsman international llc's dollar denominated 73/8% senior subordinated notes due 2015 and euro denominated
71/2% senior subordinated notes due 2015 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.4 to huntsman international llc's current report on form 8-k filed on august 22, 2005 (file no. 333-85141))



 
  
 
 


 
4.10
 
form of restricted stock agreement for outside directors, effective for grants prior to february 6, 2008 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.7 to our registration statement on form s-8 filed on
february 10, 2006)


 
  
 
 


 
4.11
 
form of restricted stock unit agreement for outside directors, effective for grants prior to february 6, 2008 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.8 of our registration statement on form s-8 filed on
february 10, 2006)


 
  
 
 


 
4.12
 
form of restricted stock agreement for outside directors (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.31 to our annual report on form 10-k filed on february 22, 2008)


 
  
 
 


 
4.13
 
form of restricted stock unit agreement for outside directors, effective for grants from february 6, 2008 to september 21, 2010 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.32 to our annual report on
form 10-k filed on february 22, 2008)


 
  
 
 


 
4.14
 
indenture, dated as of july 6, 2009, by and among huntsman international llc, the subsidiary guarantors named therein and wilmington trust fsb, a federal savings bank, as trustee (incorporated by reference to
exhibit 4.1 to our current report on form 8-k filed on july 8, 2009)


 
  
 
 


 
4.15
 
form of 51/2% senior note due 2016 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.2 to our current report on form 8-k filed on july 8, 2009)


 
  
 
 


 
4.16
 
form of guarantee (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.3 to our current report on form 8-k filed on july 8, 2009)


 
  
 
 


 
4.17
 
amended and restated indenture, dated as of september 10, 2009, by and among huntsman international llc, the subsidiary guarantors named therein and wilmington trust fsb, a federal savings bank, as trustee
(incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.1 to our current report on form 8-k filed on september 14, 2009)


 
  
 
 


 
4.18
 
indenture, dated as of march 17, 2010, by and among huntsman international llc, the subsidiary guarantors therein and wells fargo bank, national association, as trustee (incorporated by reference to
exhibit 4.1 to our current report on form 8-k filed on march 19, 2010)


 
  
 
 


 
4.19
 
form of 85/8% senior subordinated note due 2020 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.2 to our current report on form 8-k filed on march 19, 2010)


 
  
 
 


 
4.20
 
form of guarantee (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.3 to our current report on form 8-k filed on march 19, 2010)


 


 
 



 
104




 

table of contents
 














number 
 
description 


 
4.21
 
indenture, dated as of september 24, 2010, by and among huntsman international llc, the subsidiary guarantors named therein and wells fargo bank, national association, as trustee (incorporated by reference to
exhibit 4.1 to our current report on form 8-k filed on september 30, 2010)


 
  
 
 


 
4.22
 
form of 85/8% senior subordinated note due 2021 (included as exhibit a to exhibit 4.24) (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.2 to our current report on form 8-k filed on
september 30, 2010)


 
  
 
 


 
4.23
 
form of guarantee (included as exhibit e to exhibit 4.24) (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.3 to our current report on form 8-k filed on september 30, 2010)


 
  
 
 


 
10.1
 
employment agreement with anthony hankins (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.27 to amendment no. 2 to our registration statement on form s-1 filed on january 28, 2005)


 
  
 
 


 
10.2
 
huntsman corporation stock incentive plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.19 to amendment no. 4 to our registration statement on form s-1 filed on february 8, 2005)


 
  
 
 


 
10.3
 
form of nonqualified stock option agreement, effective for grants prior to february 21, 2011 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.20 to amendment no. 4 to our registration statement on form s-1
filed on february 8, 2005)


 
  
 
 


 
10.4
 
form of restricted stock agreement, effective for grants prior to february 6, 2008 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.21 to amendment no. 4 to our registration statement on form s-1 filed on
february 8, 2005)


 
  
 
 


 
10.5
 
form of stock appreciation rights agreement (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.22 to amendment no. 4 to our registration statement on form s-1 filed on february 8, 2005)


 
  
 
 


 
10.6
 
form of phantom share agreement, effective for grants prior to february 6, 2008 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.23 to amendment no. 4 to our registration statement on form s-1 filed on
february 8, 2005)


 
  
 
 


 
10.7
 
form of executive severance plan (as amended and restated) (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.24 to amendment no. 4 to our registration statement on form s-1 filed on february 8, 2005)



 
  
 
 


 
10.8
 
form of indemnification agreement (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.25 to amendment no. 4 to our registration statement on form s-1 filed on february 8, 2005)


 
  
 
 


 
10.9
 
credit agreement dated august 16, 2005 among huntsman international llc, deutsche bank ag new york branch as administrative agent and the other financial institutions named therein (incorporated by reference to
exhibit 10.1 to huntsman international llc's current report on form 8-k filed august 22, 2005 (file no. 333-85141))


 
  
 
 


 
10.10
 
form of non-qualified stock option agreement for outside directors (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to our current report on form 8-k filed november 8, 2005 (file no. 001-32427))


 
  
 
 


 
10.11
 
consent and first amendment to credit agreement dated december 12, 2005 among the company, deutsche bank ag new york branch as administrative agent and the other financial institutions named therein (incorporated by
reference to exhibit 10.1 to huntsman international llc's current report on form 8-k filed december 27, 2005 (file no. 333-85141)


 


 
 



 
105




 

table of contents
 














number 
 
description 


 
10.12
 
amended and restated huntsman supplemental executive retirement plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to our current report on form 8-k filed december 30, 2005 (file no. 001-32427))



 
  
 
 


 
10.13
 
huntsman supplemental executive mpp plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.2 to our current report on form 8-k filed december 30, 2005 (file no. 001-32427))


 
  
 
 


 
10.14
 
amended and restated huntsman supplemental savings plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.3 to our current report on form 8-k filed december 30, 2005 (file no. 001-32427))


 
  
 
 


 
10.15
 
huntsman outside directors elective deferral plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.4 to our current report on form 8-k filed december 30, 2005 (file no. 001-32427))


 
  
 
 


 
10.16
 
consent and second amendment to credit agreement and amendment to security documents, dated june 30, 2006, by and among huntsman international llc, as borrower, deutsche bank ag new york branch, as
administrative agent and collateral agent, and the other financial institutions party thereto (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to our current report on form 8-k filed on july 7, 2006 (file no. 001-32427))


 
  
 
 


 
10.17
 
third amendment to credit agreement dated april 19, 2007 by and among huntsman international llc, as borrower, deutsche bank ag new york branch, as administrative agent and collateral agent, and the other
financial institutions party thereto (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to our current report on form 8-k filed on april 23, 2007)


 
  
 
 


 
10.18
 
first amendment to huntsman supplemental executive retirement plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.32 to our annual report on form 10-k filed on february 22, 2008)


 
  
 
 


 
10.19
 
first amendment to huntsman supplemental executive mpp plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.33 to our annual report on form 10-k filed on february 22, 2008)


 
  
 
 


 
10.20
 
first amendment to huntsman supplemental savings plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.34 to our annual report on form 10-k filed on february 22, 2008)


 
  
 
 


 
10.21
 
second amendment to huntsman supplemental savings plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.35 to our annual report on form 10-k filed on february 22, 2008)


 
  
 
 


 
10.22
 
first amendment to huntsman outside directors elective deferral plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.36 to our annual report on form 10-k filed on february 22, 2008)


 
  
 
 


 
10.23
 
form of restricted stock agreement effective for grants from february 6, 2008 to september 21, 2010 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.37 to our annual report on form 10-k filed on
february 22, 2008)


 
  
 
 


 
10.24
 
form of phantom share agreement effective for grants from february 6, 2008 to february 23, 2010 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.38 to our annual report on form 10-k filed on february 22,
2008)


 
  
 
 


 
10.25
 
letter agreement, dated june 15, 2009, among huntsman polyurethanes (uk) ltd. and paul g. hulme (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to our current report on form 8-k filed on june 17,
2009)


 
  
 
 


 
10.26
 
fourth amendment to credit agreement, dated as of june 22, 2009, by and among huntsman international llc and credit suisse securities (usa) llc and deutsche bank securities inc. (incorporated by
reference to exhibit 10.3 to our current report on form 8-k filed on june 23, 2009)



 
106




 

table of contents
 














number 
 
description 


 
10.27
 
form of registration rights agreement dated as of june 23, 2009, by and among huntsman international llc, the subsidiary guarantors party thereto and credit suisse securities (usa) llc and deutsche bank
securities inc. (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.4 to our current report on form 8-k filed on june 23, 2009)


 
  
 
 


 
10.28
 
voting agreement, dated as of june 22, 2009, by and among huntsman international llc, deutsche bank ag new york branch and credit suisse, cayman islands branch (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.5 to
our current report on form 8-k filed on june 23, 2009)


 
  
 
 


 
10.29
 
u.s. receivables loan agreement dated as of october 16, 2009 among huntsman receivables finance ii llc, huntsman (europe) bvba, the several entities party thereto as lenders, the several financial institutions
party thereto as funding agents, the several commercial paper conduits party thereto as conduit lenders, the several financial institutions party thereto as committed lenders, wachovia bank national association, as administrative agent, and wachovia
bank national association, as collateral agent (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to our current report on form 8-k filed on october 22, 2009)


 
  
 
 


 
10.30
 
u.s. contribution agreement dated as of october 16, 2009 between huntsman international llc and huntsman receivables finance ii llc (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.2 to our current report on
form 8-k filed on october 22, 2009)


 
  
 
 


 
10.31
 
european receivables loan agreement dated as of october 16, 2009 between huntsman receivables finance llc, huntsman (europe) bvba, the several entities party thereto as lenders, the several financial
institutions party thereto as funding agents, barclays bank plc, as administrative agent, and barclays bank plc, as collateral agent (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.3 to our current report on form 8-k filed on
october 22, 2009)


 
  
 
 


 
10.32
 
european contribution agreement dated as of october 16, 2009 between huntsman international llc and huntsman receivables finance llc (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.4 to our current report on
form 8-k filed on october 22, 2009)


 
  
 
 


 
10.33
 
fifth amendment to credit agreement, dated as of march 9, 2010, by and among huntsman international llc, jpmorgan chase bank, n.a. and the other financial institutions party thereto (incorporated by reference to
exhibit 10.1 to our current report on form 10-q filed on may 7, 2010)


 
  
 
 


 
10.34
 
registration rights agreement, dated as of march 17, 2010, by and among huntsman international llc, the subsidiary guarantors named therein and goldman, sachs & co., j.p. morgan
securities inc., barclays capital inc., banc of america securities llc, citigroup global markets inc. and credit suisse securities (usa) llc (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to our current report on
form 8-k filed on march 19, 2010)


 
  
 
 


 
10.35
 
registration rights agreement, dated as of september 24, 2010, by and among huntsman international llc, the subsidiary guarantors named therein and goldman, sachs & co., j.p. morgan
securities llc, barclays capital inc., banc of america securities llc, citigroup global markets inc., credit suisse securities (usa) llc and hsbc securities (usa) inc. (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1
to our current report on form 8-k filed on september 30, 2010)


 
  
 
 


 
10.36
 
certain exhibits and schedules to exhibit a to the fifth amendment to credit agreement, dated as of march 9, 2010, which was previously filed as exhibit 10.1 to our quarterly report on form 10-q filed
may 7, 2010 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.2 to our current report on form 10-q filed on november 4, 2010)



 
107




 

table of contents
 














number 
 
description 


 
10.37
 
registration rights agreement, dated as of november 12, 2010, by and among huntsman international llc, the subsidiary guarantors named therein and citigroup global markets inc. (incorporated by reference to
exhibit 10.1 to our current report on form 8-k filed on november 15, 2010)


 
  
 
 


 
10.38
 
second amendment to huntsman supplemental executive retirement plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.38 to our annual report on form 10-k filed on february 17, 2011)


 
  
 
 


 
10.39
 
third amendment to huntsman supplemental executive retirement plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.39 to our annual report on form 10-k filed on february 17, 2011)


 
  
 
 


 
10.40
 
form of restricted stock agreement (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.40 to our annual report on form 10-k filed on february 17, 2011)


 
  
 
 


 
10.41
 
form of phantom share agreement (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.41 to our annual report on form 10-k filed on february 17, 2011)


 
  
 
 


 
10.42
 
form of nonqualified stock option agreement (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.42 to our annual report on form 10-k filed on february 17, 2011)


 
  
 
 


 
10.43
 
form of restricted stock unit agreement for outside directors (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.43 to our annual report on form 10-k filed on february 17, 2011)


 
  
 
 


 
10.44
 
sixth amendment, dated as of march 7, 2011, to the credit agreement, dated as of august 16, 2005, among huntsman international llc, the lenders from time to time party thereto, and jpmorgan chase bank, n.a.,
as administrative agent (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to our current report on form 8-k filed on march 9, 2011)


 
  
 
 


 
10.45
 
master amendment no. 2 to the u.s. receivables loan agreement, u.s. servicing agreement and transaction documents dated as of april 18, 2011 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to our current report
on form 8-k filed on april 20, 2011)


 
  
 
 


 
10.46
 
master amendment no. 2 to the european receivables loan agreement, european servicing agreement and transaction documents dated as of april 15, 2011 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.2 to our current
report on form 8-k filed on april 20, 2011)


 
  
 
 


 
10.47
 
huntsman executive severance plan (as amended and restated) (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.4 to our current report on form 10-q filed on may 5, 2011)


 
  
 
 


 
10.48
 
second amendment to huntsman outside directors elective deferral plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.5 to our current report on form 10-q filed on may 5, 2011)


 
  
 
 


 
10.49
 
third amendment to huntsman outside directors elective deferral plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.6 to our current report on form 10-q filed on may 5, 2011)


 
  
 
 


 
10.50
 
huntsman corporation stock incentive plan (amended and restated) (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.1 to our registration statement on form s-8 filed on may 10, 2011)


 
  
 
 


 
21.1
*
subsidiaries of the company


 
  
 
 


 
23.1
*
consent of independent registered public accounting firm


 
  
 
 


 
31.1
*
certification of chief executive officer pursuant to section 302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002


 
  
 
 


 
31.2
*
certification of chief financial officer pursuant to section 302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002



 
108




 

table of contents
 














number 
 
description 


 
32.1
*
certification of chief executive officer pursuant to section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002


 
  
 
 


 
32.2
*
certification of chief financial officer pursuant to section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002


 
  
 
 


 
101.ins
*†
xbrl instance document


 
  
 
 


 
101.sch
*†
xbrl taxonomy extension schema


 
  
 
 


 
101.cal
*†
xbrl taxonomy extension calculation linkbase


 
  
 
 


 
101.lab
*†
xbrl taxonomy extension label linkbase


 
  
 
 


 
101.pre
*†
xbrl taxonomy extension presentation linkbase


 
  
 
 


 
101.def
*†
xbrl taxonomy extension definition linkbase







 

 
*filed
herewith.
†pursuant
to rule 406t of regulation s-t, the interactive data files on exhibit 101 hereto are deemed not filed or
part of a registration statement or prospectus for purposes of sections 11 or 12 of the securities act of 1933, as amended, are deemed not filed for purposes of section 18 of the
securities and exchange act of 1934, as amended, and otherwise are not subject to liability under those sections. 
 
109






 









































table of contents 

 
 
signatures        

pursuant to the requirements of section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934, the registrants have duly caused
this report to be signed on their behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized. 

dated:
february 16, 2012 
 















 
 
huntsman corporation
huntsman international llc



 
 
by:
 
/s/ j. kimo esplin




j. kimo esplin executive vice president and chief financial officer



 
pursuant
to the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of huntsman corporation in the capacities
indicated on the 16th day of february 2012. 
 













/s/ jon m. huntsman




jon m. huntsman executive chairman of the board and director
 
/s/ peter r. huntsman




peter r. huntsman president, chief executive officer and director
(principal executive officer)


/s/ j. kimo esplin




j. kimo esplin executive vice president and
chief financial officer
(principal financial officer)
 
/s/ l. russell healy




l. russell healy vice president and controller
(principal accounting officer)


/s/ nolan d. archibald




nolan d. archibald chairman of the compensation committee and
director
 
/s/ wayne a. reaud




wayne a. reaud chairman of the litigation committee and
director


/s/ alvin v. shoemaker




alvin v. shoemaker director
 
/s/ m. anthony burns




m. anthony burns chairman of the audit committee and director


/s/ patrick harker




patrick harker director
 
/s/ sir robert margetts




sir robert margetts director


/s/ jon m. huntsman, jr.




jon m. huntsman, jr. director
 
/s/ mary c. beckerle




mary c. beckerle director



 
110




 

table of contents

pursuant
to the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of huntsman international in the capacities
indicated on the 16th day of february 2012. 
 













/s/ jon m. huntsman




jon m. huntsman chairman of the board of managers and manager
 
/s/ peter r. huntsman




peter r. huntsman president, chief executive officer and manager
(principal executive officer)


/s/ j. kimo esplin




j. kimo esplin executive vice president, chief financial
officer and manager
(principal financial officer)
 
/s/ l. russell healy




l. russell healy vice president and controller
(principal accounting officer)


/s/ james r. moore




james r. moore executive vice president, general counsel,
secretary and manager
 

 



 
111






 









































table of contents 

huntsman corporation and subsidiaries  

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries  

index to consolidated financial statements        


 
 
















 
 
page 
 


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries:
 
 
 
 


consolidated financial statements
 
 
 
 


report of independent registered public accounting firm
 
 
f-2
 


consolidated balance sheets as of december 31, 2011 and 2010
 
 
f-3
 


consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive (loss) income for the years ended december 31, 2011, 2010 and
2009
 
 
f-4
 


consolidated statements of equity for the years ended december 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009
 
 
f-6
 


consolidated statements of cash flows for the years ended december 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009
 
 
f-7
 


huntsman international llc and subsidiaries:
 
 
 
 


consolidated financial statements
 
 
 
 


report of independent registered public accounting firm
 
 
f-9
 


consolidated balance sheets as of december 31, 2011 and 2010
 
 
f-10
 


consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive (loss) income for the years ended december 31, 2011, 2010 and
2009
 
 
f-11
 


consolidated statements of equity for the years ended december 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009
 
 
f-12
 


consolidated statements of cash flows for the years ended december 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009
 
 
f-13
 


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries and huntsman international llc and subsidiaries:
 
 
 
 


notes to consolidated financial statements
 
 
f-15
 


schedules to consolidated financial statements
 
 
 
 


schedule to consolidated financial statements, schedule i—condensed financial information of registrant (huntsman
corporation only)
 
 
f-116
 


schedule to consolidated financial statements, schedule ii—valuation and qualifying accounts (huntsman corporation
and subsidiaries and huntsman international llc and subsidiaries)
 
 
f-120
 




 
f-1






 









































table of contents 

 
 
report of independent registered public accounting firm        

to
the board of directors and stockholders of
huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

we
have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of huntsman corporation and subsidiaries (the "company") as of december 31, 2011 and 2010, and the related
consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive (loss) income, equity, and cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended december 31, 2011. our audits also included the
financial statement schedules listed in the index on page f-1. these financial statements and financial statement schedules are the responsibility of the company's management. our
responsibility is to express an opinion on the financial statements and financial statement schedules based on our audits. 


we
conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states). those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement. an audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in
the financial statements. an audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement
presentation. we believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion. 

in
our opinion, such consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of huntsman corporation and subsidiaries as of december 31,
2011 and 2010, and the results of their operations and their cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended december 31, 2011, in conformity with accounting principles generally
accepted in the united states of america. also, in our opinion, such financial statement schedules, when considered in relation to the basic consolidated financial statements taken as a whole, present
fairly, in all material respects, the information set forth therein. 

as
discussed in notes 2, 14 and 16 to the consolidated financial statements, the company adopted new accounting guidance which changed its method of accounting for transfers of
accounts receivable under the company's accounts receivable securitization programs, effective january 1, 2010. 


we
have also audited, in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states), the company's internal control over financial reporting as of
december 31, 2011, based on the criteria established in internal control—integrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring
organizations of the treadway commission and our report dated february 16, 2012 expressed an unqualified opinion on the company's internal control over financial reporting. 


/s/
deloitte & touche llp 

houston,
texas
february 16, 2012 

f-2






 









































table of contents 

 

 
huntsman corporation and subsidiaries            consolidated balance sheets            (in millions, except share and per share amounts)        
 


















 
 
december 31,
2011 
 
december 31,
2010 
 


assets
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


current assets:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


cash and cash equivalents(a)
 
$
554
 
$
966
 


restricted cash(a)
 
 
8
 
 
7
 


accounts and notes receivable (net of allowance for doubtful accounts of $46 and $52, respectively), ($659 and $589 pledged as collateral, respectively)(a)

 
 
1,529
 
 
1,413
 


accounts receivable from affiliates
 
 
5
 
 
15
 


inventories(a)
 
 
1,539
 
 
1,396
 


prepaid expenses
 
 
46
 
 
46
 


deferred income taxes
 
 
20
 
 
1
 


other current assets(a)
 
 
245
 
 
164
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total current assets
 
 
3,946
 
 
4,008
 


property, plant and equipment, net(a)
 
 
3,622
 
 
3,605
 


investment in unconsolidated affiliates
 
 
202
 
 
234
 


intangible assets, net(a)
 
 
91
 
 
105
 


goodwill
 
 
114
 
 
94
 


deferred income taxes
 
 
195
 
 
166
 


notes receivable from affiliates
 
 
5
 
 
7
 


other noncurrent assets(a)
 
 
482
 
 
495
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total assets
 
$
8,657
 
$
8,714
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


liabilities and equity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


current liabilities:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


accounts payable(a)
 
$
862
 
$
842
 


accounts payable to affiliates
 
 
50
 
 
45
 


accrued liabilities(a)
 
 
695
 
 
628
 


deferred income taxes
 
 
7
 
 
19
 


current portion of debt(a)
 
 
212
 
 
519
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total current liabilities
 
 
1,826
 
 
2,053
 


long-term debt(a)
 
 
3,730
 
 
3,627
 


notes payable to affiliates
 
 
4
 
 
4
 


deferred income taxes
 
 
309
 
 
314
 


other noncurrent liabilities(a)
 
 
1,012
 
 
866
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total liabilities
 
 
6,881
 
 
6,864
 


commitments and contingencies (notes 19 and 20)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


equity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


huntsman corporation stockholders' equity:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


common stock $0.01 par value, 1,200,000,000 shares authorized, 241,836,001 and 239,549,365 issued and 235,746,087 and 236,799,455 outstanding in 2011 and
2010, respectively
 
 
2
 
 
2
 


additional paid-in capital
 
 
3,228
 
 
3,186
 


treasury stock, 4,043,526 shares at december 31, 2011
 
 
(50
)
 
—
 


unearned stock-based compensation
 
 
(12
)
 
(11
)


accumulated deficit
 
 
(947
)
 
(1,090
)


accumulated other comprehensive loss
 
 
(559
)
 
(297
)


 
 
 
 
 
 


total huntsman corporation stockholders' equity
 
 
1,662
 
 
1,790
 


noncontrolling interests in subsidiaries
 
 
114
 
 
60
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total equity
 
 
1,776
 
 
1,850
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total liabilities and equity
 
$
8,657
 
$
8,714
 


 
 
 
 
 
 







 

 
(a)at
december 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively, $44 and $7 of cash and cash equivalents, $2 and nil of restricted cash, $29 and $8 of accounts and notes
receivable (net), $47 and $45 of inventories, $1 and $2 of other current assets, $403 and $275 of property, plant and equipment (net), $23 and $7 of intangible assets (net), $21 and $18 of other
noncurrent assets, $55 and $56 of accounts payable, $21 and $16 of accrued liabilities, $16 and $15 of current portion of debt, $264 and $185 of long-term debt, and $111 and $109 of other
noncurrent liabilities from consolidated variable interest entities are included in the respective balance sheet captions above. see "note 7. variable interest entities." 
 

   

   
 
see accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.

f-3






 



































 




table of contents 

 

 
huntsman corporation and subsidiaries            consolidated statements of operations and            comprehensive (loss) income            (in millions, except per
share amounts)        
 





















 
 
year ended
december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


revenues:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


trade sales, services and fees, net
 
$
11,041
 
$
9,049
 
$
7,569
 


related party sales
 
 
180
 
 
201
 
 
96
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total revenues
 
 
11,221
 
 
9,250
 
 
7,665
 


cost of goods sold
 
 
9,381
 
 
7,789
 
 
6,587
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


gross profit
 
 
1,840
 
 
1,461
 
 
1,078
 


operating expenses:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


selling, general and administrative
 
 
921
 
 
861
 
 
850
 


research and development
 
 
166
 
 
151
 
 
145
 


other operating (income) expense
 
 
(20
)
 
10
 
 
(18
)


restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs
 
 
167
 
 
29
 
 
88
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total expenses
 
 
1,234
 
 
1,051
 
 
1,065
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


operating income
 
 
606
 
 
410
 
 
13
 


interest expense, net
 
 
(249
)
 
(229
)
 
(238
)


loss on accounts receivable securitization program
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(23
)


equity in income of investment in unconsolidated affiliates
 
 
8
 
 
24
 
 
3
 


loss on early extinguishment of debt
 
 
(7
)
 
(183
)
 
(21
)


(expenses) income associated with the terminated merger and related litigation
 
 
—
 
 
(4
)
 
835
 


other income
 
 
2
 
 
2
 
 
—
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


income from continuing operations before income taxes
 
 
360
 
 
20
 
 
569
 


income tax expense
 
 
(109
)
 
(29
)
 
(444
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


income (loss) from continuing operations
 
 
251
 
 
(9
)
 
125
 


(loss) income from discontinued operations, (including gain on disposal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


of $1 in 2009), net of tax
 
 
(1
)
 
42
 
 
(19
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


income before extraordinary gain (loss)
 
 
250
 
 
33
 
 
106
 


extraordinary gain (loss) on the acquisition of a business, net of tax of nil
 
 
4
 
 
(1
)
 
6
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net income
 
 
254
 
 
32
 
 
112
 


net (income) loss attributable to noncontrolling interests
 
 
(7
)
 
(5
)
 
2
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net income attributable to huntsman corporation
 
$
247
 
$
27
 
$
114
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net income
 
$
254
 
$
32
 
$
112
 


other comprehensive (loss) income
 
 
(267
)
 
(11
)
 
203
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


comprehensive (loss) income
 
 
(13
)
 
21
 
 
315
 


comprehensive (income) loss attributable to noncontrolling interests
 
 
(2
)
 
(4
)
 
1
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


comprehensive (loss) income attributable to huntsman corporation
 
$
(15
)
$
17
 
$
316
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 

   

   
  
(continued) 

f-4




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries  

consolidated statements of operations and (continued)  

comprehensive (loss) income  

(in millions, except per share amounts)  
 





















 
 
year ended
december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


basic income (loss) per share:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


income (loss) from continuing operations attributable to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


huntsman corporation common stockholders
 
$
1.03
 
$
(0.06
)
$
0.54
 


income (loss) from discontinued operations attributable to huntsman corporation common stockholders, net of tax
 
 
—
 
 
0.17
 
 
(0.08
)


extraordinary gain on the acquisition of a business attributable to huntsman corporation common stockholders, net of tax
 
 
0.01
 
 
—
 
 
0.03
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net income attributable to huntsman corporation common stockholders
 
$
1.04
 
$
0.11
 
$
0.49
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


weighted average shares
 
 
237.6
 
 
236.0
 
 
233.9
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


diluted income (loss) per share:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


income (loss) from continuing operations attributable to huntsman corporation common stockholders
 
$
1.01
 
$
(0.06
)
$
0.53
 


income (loss) from discontinued operations attributable to huntsman corporation common stockholders, net of tax
 
 
—
 
 
0.17
 
 
(0.08
)


extraordinary gain on the acquisition of a business attributable to huntsman corporation common stockholders, net of tax
 
 
0.01
 
 
—
 
 
0.03
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net income attributable to huntsman corporation common stockholders
 
$
1.02
 
$
0.11
 
$
0.48
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


weighted average shares
 
 
241.7
 
 
236.0
 
 
238.3
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


amounts attributable to huntsman corporation common stockholders:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


income (loss) from continuing operations
 
$
244
 
$
(14
)
$
127
 


(loss) income from discontinued operations, net of tax
 
 
(1
)
 
42
 
 
(19
)


extraordinary gain (loss) on the acquisition of a business, net of tax
 
 
4
 
 
(1
)
 
6
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net income
 
$
247
 
$
27
 
$
114
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


dividends per share
 
$
0.40
 
$
0.40
 
$
0.40
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 

   

   
  
see accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements. 

f-5






 








































table of contents 

huntsman corporation and subsidiaries  

consolidated statements of equity  

(dollars in millions)
 







































 
 
huntsman corporation stockholders 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
shares 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
accumulated
other
comprehensive
(loss) income 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
common
stock 
 
common
stock 
 
additional
paid-in
capital 
 
treasury
stock 
 
unearned
stock-based
compensation 
 
accumulated
deficit 
 
noncontrolling
interests in
subsidiaries 
 
total
equity 
 


balance, january 1, 2009
 
 
233,553,515
 
$
2
 
$
3,141
 
$
—
 
$
(13
)
$
(1,031
)
$
(489
)
$
22
 
$
1,632
 


net income
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
114
 
 
—
 
 
(2
)
 
112
 


other comprehensive income
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
202
 
 
1
 
 
203
 


issuance of nonvested stock awards
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
8
 
 
—
 
 
(8
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


vesting of stock awards
 
 
742,565
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


recognition of stock-based compensation
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
6
 
 
—
 
 
10
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
16
 


repurchase and cancellation of stock awards
 
 
(214,590
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(2
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(2
)


dividends declared on common stock
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(96
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(96
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


balance, december 31, 2009
 
 
234,081,490
 
 
2
 
 
3,155
 
 
—
 
 
(11
)
 
(1,015
)
 
(287
)
 
21
 
 
1,865
 


net income
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
27
 
 
—
 
 
5
 
 
32
 


other comprehensive loss
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(10
)
 
(1
)
 
(11
)


consolidation of a variable interest entity
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
35
 
 
35
 


issuance of nonvested stock awards
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
12
 
 
—
 
 
(12
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


vesting of stock awards
 
 
1,939,524
 
 
—
 
 
9
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
9
 


recognition of stock-based compensation
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
3
 
 
—
 
 
12
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
15
 


repurchase and cancellation of stock awards
 
 
(431,052
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(6
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(6
)


stock options exercised
 
 
1,209,493
 
 
—
 
 
3
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
3
 


excess tax benefit related to stock- based compensation
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
4
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
4
 


dividends declared on common stock
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(96
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(96
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


balance, december 31, 2010
 
 
236,799,455
 
 
2
 
 
3,186
 
 
—
 
 
(11
)
 
(1,090
)
 
(297
)
 
60
 
 
1,850
 


net income
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
247
 
 
—
 
 
7
 
 
254
 


dividend paid to noncontrolling interest
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(9
)
 
(9
)


other comprehensive loss
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(262
)
 
(5
)
 
(267
)


consolidation of a variable interest entity
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
61
 
 
61
 


issuance of nonvested stock awards
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
11
 
 
—
 
 
(11
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


vesting of stock awards
 
 
2,229,418
 
 
—
 
 
13
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
13
 


recognition of stock-based compensation
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
5
 
 
—
 
 
10
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
15
 


repurchase of common stock
 
 
(4,043,526
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(50
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(50
)


repurchase and cancellation of stock awards
 
 
(507,624
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(8
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(8
)


stock options exercised
 
 
1,268,364
 
 
—
 
 
3
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
3
 


excess tax benefit related to stock- based compensation
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
10
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
10
 


dividends declared on common stock
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(96
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(96
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


balance, december 31, 2011
 
 
235,746,087
 
$
2
 
$
3,228
 
$
(50
)
$
(12
)
$
(947
)
$
(559
)
$
114
 
$
1,776
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
see accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements. 

f-6






 









































table of contents 

 

 
huntsman corporation and subsidiaries            consolidated statements of cash flows            (dollars in millions)        
 





















 
 
year ended december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


operating activities:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net income
 
$
254
 
$
32
 
$
112
 


adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by (used in) operating activities:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


extraordinary (gain) loss on the acquisition of a business, net of tax
 
 
(4
)
 
1
 
 
(6
)


gain on the consolidation of a variable interest entity
 
 
(12
)
 
—
 
 
—
 


equity in income of investment in unconsolidated affiliates
 
 
(8
)
 
(24
)
 
(3
)


dividends received from unconsolidated affiliates
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
11
 


depreciation and amortization
 
 
439
 
 
405
 
 
442
 


provision for (gains) losses on accounts receivable
 
 
(4
)
 
6
 
 
9
 


(gain) loss on disposal of businesses/assets, net
 
 
(38
)
 
8
 
 
(2
)


loss on early extinguishment of debt
 
 
7
 
 
183
 
 
21
 


noncash interest expense
 
 
38
 
 
22
 
 
22
 


deferred income taxes
 
 
(23
)
 
45
 
 
231
 


noncash impairment charge
 
 
60
 
 
2
 
 
13
 


noncash (gain) loss on foreign currency transactions
 
 
(32
)
 
22
 
 
(26
)


stock-based compensation
 
 
24
 
 
27
 
 
20
 


portion of insurance settlement representing cash provided by investing activities
 
 
—
 
 
(34
)
 
—
 


other, net
 
 
(1
)
 
2
 
 
1
 


changes in operating assets and liabilities:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


accounts and notes receivable
 
 
(121
)
 
(183
)
 
(88
)


accounts receivable from a/r programs
 
 
—
 
 
(254
)
 
—
 


inventories
 
 
(161
)
 
(207
)
 
351
 


prepaid expenses
 
 
(4
)
 
(2
)
 
5
 


other current assets
 
 
(108
)
 
(5
)
 
(6
)


other noncurrent assets
 
 
2
 
 
(102
)
 
(32
)


accounts payable
 
 
24
 
 
83
 
 
35
 


accrued liabilities
 
 
112
 
 
(22
)
 
(34
)


other noncurrent liabilities
 
 
(79
)
 
(63
)
 
28
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net cash provided by (used in) operating activities
 
 
365
 
 
(58
)
 
1,104
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


investing activities:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


capital expenditures
 
 
(330
)
 
(236
)
 
(189
)


proceeds from settlements treated as reimbursement of capital expenditures
 
 
3
 
 
34
 
 
—
 


acquisition of businesses, net of cash acquired and post-closing adjustments
 
 
(34
)
 
—
 
 
(31
)


cash assumed in connection with the initial consolidation of a variable interest entity
 
 
28
 
 
14
 
 
—
 


proceeds from sale of businesses/assets
 
 
48
 
 
2
 
 
5
 


investment in unconsolidated affiliates
 
 
(26
)
 
(27
)
 
(15
)


cash received from unconsolidated affiliates
 
 
32
 
 
31
 
 
22
 


other, net
 
 
(1
)
 
—
 
 
3
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net cash used in investing activities
 
 
(280
)
 
(182
)
 
(205
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 

   

   
  
(continued) 

f-7




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries  

consolidated statements of cash flows (continued)  

(dollars in millions)  
 





















 
 
year ended december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


financing activities:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net repayments under revolving loan facilities
 
$
(2
)
 
(6
)
$
(14
)


revolving loan facility from a/r programs
 
 
—
 
 
254
 
 
—
 


net borrowings (repayments) on overdraft facilities
 
 
9
 
 
(2
)
 
(12
)


repayments of short-term debt
 
 
(187
)
 
(175
)
 
(13
)


borrowings on short-term debt
 
 
162
 
 
212
 
 
—
 


repayments of long-term debt
 
 
(408
)
 
(1,456
)
 
(542
)


proceeds from issuance of long-term debt
 
 
98
 
 
923
 
 
880
 


repayments of notes payable
 
 
(34
)
 
(53
)
 
(66
)


borrowings on notes payable
 
 
35
 
 
46
 
 
67
 


debt issuance costs paid
 
 
(7
)
 
(29
)
 
(5
)


call premiums related to early extinguishment of debt
 
 
(6
)
 
(160
)
 
(14
)


dividends paid to common stockholders
 
 
(96
)
 
(96
)
 
(96
)


repurchase and cancellation of stock awards
 
 
(8
)
 
(6
)
 
(2
)


repuchase of common stock
 
 
(50
)
 
—
 
 
—
 


proceeds from issuance of common stock
 
 
3
 
 
3
 
 
—
 


dividends paid to noncontrolling interest
 
 
(9
)
 
—
 
 
—
 


excess tax benefit related to stock-based compensation
 
 
10
 
 
4
 
 
—
 


other, net
 
 
—
 
 
(2
)
 
1
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net cash (used in) provided by financing activities
 
 
(490
)
 
(543
)
 
184
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


effect of exchange rate changes on cash
 
 
(7
)
 
4
 
 
5
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


(decrease) increase in cash and cash equivalents
 
 
(412
)
 
(779
)
 
1,088
 


cash and cash equivalents at beginning of period
 
 
966
 
 
1,745
 
 
657
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


cash and cash equivalents at end of period
 
$
554
 
$
966
 
$
1,745
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


supplemental cash flow information:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


cash paid for interest
 
$
204
 
$
203
 
$
227
 


cash paid for income taxes
 
 
119
 
 
6
 
 
155
 



 
during
2011, 2010 and 2009, the amount of capital expenditures in accounts payable increased (decreased) by $16, $14 and $(13), respectively. the value of share awards that vested during
2011, 2010 and 2009 was $23, $18 and $12, respectively. 
   

   
  
see accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements. 

f-8






 









































table of contents 

 

 
 
report of independent registered public accounting firm        

to
the board of managers and members of
huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

we
have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of huntsman international llc and subsidiaries (the "company") as of december 31, 2011 and 2010, and the
related consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive (loss) income, equity, and cash flows for each of the three years ended december 31, 2011. our audits also included the financial
statement schedule listed in the index on page f-1. these financial statements and financial statement schedule are the
responsibility of the company's management. our responsibility is to express an opinion on the financial statements and financial statement schedule based on our audits. 


we
conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states). those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement. an audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in
the financial statements. an audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement
presentation. we believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion. 

in
our opinion, such consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of huntsman international llc and subsidiaries as of
december 31, 2011 and 2010, and the results of their operations and their cash flows for each of the three years ended december 31, 2011, in conformity with accounting principles
generally accepted in the united states of america. also, in our opinion, such financial statement schedule, when considered in relation to the basic consolidated financial statements taken as a
whole, presents fairly, in all material respects, the information set forth therein. 

as
discussed in notes 2, 14 and 16 to the consolidated financial statements, the company adopted new accounting guidance which changed its method of accounting for transfers of
accounts receivable under the company's accounts receivable securitization programs, effective january 1, 2010. 


we
have also audited, in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states), the company's internal control over financial reporting as of
december 31, 2011, based on the criteria established in internal control—integrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring
organizations of the treadway commission and our report dated february 16, 2012 expressed an unqualified opinion on the company's internal control over financial reporting. 


/s/
deloitte & touche llp 

houston,
texas
february 16, 2012 

f-9






 









































table of contents 

 

 
huntsman international llc and subsidiaries            consolidated balance sheets            (dollars in millions)        
 


















 
 
december 31,
2011 
 
december 31,
2010 
 


assets
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


current assets:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


cash and cash equivalents(a)
 
$
231
 
$
561
 


restricted cash(a)
 
 
8
 
 
7
 


accounts and notes receivable (net of allowance for doubtful accounts of $46 and $52, respectively), ($659 and $589 pledged as collateral, respectively)(a)

 
 
1,529
 
 
1,413
 


accounts receivable from affiliates
 
 
148
 
 
100
 


inventories(a)
 
 
1,539
 
 
1,396
 


prepaid expenses
 
 
46
 
 
45
 


deferred income taxes
 
 
40
 
 
40
 


other current assets(a)
 
 
220
 
 
160
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total current assets
 
 
3,761
 
 
3,722
 


property, plant and equipment, net(a)
 
 
3,510
 
 
3,469
 


investment in unconsolidated affiliates
 
 
202
 
 
234
 


intangible assets, net(a)
 
 
93
 
 
107
 


goodwill
 
 
114
 
 
94
 


deferred income taxes
 
 
163
 
 
179
 


notes receivable from affiliates
 
 
5
 
 
7
 


other noncurrent assets(a)
 
 
482
 
 
495
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total assets
 
$
8,330
 
$
8,307
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


liabilities and equity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


current liabilities:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


accounts payable(a)
 
$
862
 
$
840
 


accounts payable to affiliates
 
 
64
 
 
59
 


accrued liabilities(a)
 
 
694
 
 
626
 


deferred income taxes
 
 
29
 
 
63
 


note payable to affiliate
 
 
100
 
 
100
 


current portion of debt(a)
 
 
212
 
 
519
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total current liabilities
 
 
1,961
 
 
2,207
 


long-term debt(a)
 
 
3,730
 
 
3,627
 


notes payable to affiliates
 
 
439
 
 
439
 


deferred income taxes
 
 
106
 
 
94
 


other noncurrent liabilities(a)
 
 
1,003
 
 
852
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total liabilities
 
 
7,239
 
 
7,219
 


commitments and contingencies (notes 19 and 20)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


equity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


huntsman international llc members' equity:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


members' equity, 2,728 units issued and outstanding
 
 
3,081
 
 
3,049
 


accumulated deficit
 
 
(1,493
)
 
(1,667
)


accumulated other comprehensive loss
 
 
(611
)
 
(354
)


 
 
 
 
 
 


total huntsman international llc members' equity
 
 
977
 
 
1,028
 


noncontrolling interests in subsidiaries
 
 
114
 
 
60
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total equity
 
 
1,091
 
 
1,088
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total liabilities and equity
 
$
8,330
 
$
8,307
 


 
 
 
 
 
 







 

 
(a)at
december 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively, $44 and $7 of cash and cash equivalents, $2 and nil of restricted cash, $29 and $8 of accounts and notes
receivable (net), $47 and $45 of inventories, $1 and $2 of other current assets, $403 and $275 of property, plant and equipment (net), $23 and $7 of intangible assets (net), $21 and $18 of other
noncurrent assets, $55 and $56 of accounts payable, $21 and $16 of accrued liabilities, $16 and $15 of current portion of debt, $264 and $185 of long-term debt, and $111 and $109 of other
noncurrent liabilities from consolidated variable interest entities are included in the respective balance sheet captions above. see "note 7. variable interest entities." 
 

   

   
 
see accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.

f-10






 









































table of contents 

 

 
huntsman international llc and subsidiaries            consolidated statements of operations and            comprehensive (loss) income            (dollars in
millions)        
 





















 
 
year ended december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


revenues:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


trade sales, services and fees, net
 
$
11,041
 
$
9,049
 
$
7,569
 


related party sales
 
 
180
 
 
201
 
 
96
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total revenues
 
 
11,221
 
 
9,250
 
 
7,665
 


cost of goods sold
 
 
9,363
 
 
7,772
 
 
6,570
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


gross profit
 
 
1,858
 
 
1,478
 
 
1,095
 


operating expenses:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


selling, general and administrative
 
 
916
 
 
855
 
 
839
 


research and development
 
 
166
 
 
151
 
 
145
 


other operating income
 
 
(20
)
 
—
 
 
(18
)


restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs
 
 
167
 
 
29
 
 
88
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total expenses
 
 
1,229
 
 
1,035
 
 
1,054
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


operating income
 
 
629
 
 
443
 
 
41
 


interest expense, net
 
 
(262
)
 
(248
)
 
(240
)


loss on accounts receivable securitization program
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(23
)


equity in income of investment in unconsolidated affiliates
 
 
8
 
 
24
 
 
3
 


loss on early extinguishment of debt
 
 
(7
)
 
(37
)
 
(21
)


other income
 
 
2
 
 
2
 
 
—
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


income (loss) from continuing operations before income taxes
 
 
370
 
 
184
 
 
(240
)


income tax expense
 
 
(113
)
 
(40
)
 
(159
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


income (loss) from continuing operations
 
 
257
 
 
144
 
 
(399
)


(loss) income from discontinued operations, (including gain on disposal of $1 in 2009), net of tax
 
 
(1
)
 
42
 
 
(19
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


income (loss) before extraordinary gain (loss)
 
 
256
 
 
186
 
 
(418
)


extraordinary gain (loss) on the acquisition of a business, net of tax of nil
 
 
4
 
 
(1
)
 
6
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net income (loss)
 
 
260
 
 
185
 
 
(412
)


net (income) loss attributable to noncontrolling interests
 
 
(7
)
 
(5
)
 
2
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net income (loss) attributable to huntsman international llc
 
$
253
 
$
180
 
$
(410
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net income (loss)
 
$
260
 
$
185
 
$
(412
)


other comprehensive (loss) income
 
 
(262
)
 
(7
)
 
207
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


comprehensive (loss) income
 
 
(2
)
 
178
 
 
(205
)


comprehensive (income) loss attributable to noncontrolling interests
 
 
(2
)
 
(4
)
 
1
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


comprehensive (loss) income attributable to huntsman international llc
 
$
(4
)
$
174
 
$
(204
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 

   

   
  
see accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements. 

f-11






 









































table of contents 

 

 
huntsman international llc and subsidiaries            consolidated statements of equity            (dollars in millions)        
 






























 
 
huntsman international llc members 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
members' equity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
accumulated
deficit 
 
accumulated other
comprehensive
(loss) income 
 
noncontrolling
interests in
subsidiaries 
 
total
equity 
 


 
 
units 
 
amount 
 


balance, january 1, 2009
 
 
2,728
 
$
2,865
 
$
(1,414
)
$
(554
)
$
22
 
$
919
 


net loss
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(410
)
 
—
 
 
(2
)
 
(412
)


other comprehensive income
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
206
 
 
1
 
 
207
 


contribution from parent, net of distributions
 
 
—
 
 
156
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
156
 


dividends paid to parent
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(23
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(23
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


balance, december 31, 2009
 
 
2,728
 
 
3,021
 
 
(1,847
)
 
(348
)
 
21
 
 
847
 


net income
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
180
 
 
—
 
 
5
 
 
185
 


other comprehensive loss
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(6
)
 
(1
)
 
(7
)


consolidation of a variable interest entity
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
35
 
 
35
 


contribution from parent
 
 
—
 
 
24
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
24
 


excess tax benefit related to stock-based compensation
 
 
—
 
 
4
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
4
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


balance, december 31, 2010
 
 
2,728
 
 
3,049
 
 
(1,667
)
 
(354
)
 
60
 
 
1,088
 


net income
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
253
 
 
—
 
 
7
 
 
260
 


dividend paid to noncontrolling interest
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(9
)
 
(9
)


dividends paid to parent
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(79
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(79
)


other comprehensive loss
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(257
)
 
(5
)
 
(262
)


consolidation of a variable interest entity
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
61
 
 
61
 


contribution from parent
 
 
—
 
 
22
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
22
 


excess tax benefit related to stock-based compensation
 
 
—
 
 
10
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
10
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


balance, december 31, 2011
 
 
2,728
 
$
3,081
 
$
(1,493
)
$
(611
)
$
114
 
$
1,091
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 

   

   
  
see accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements. 

f-12






 



































 




table of contents 

 

 
huntsman international llc and subsidiaries            consolidated statements of cash flows            (dollars in millions)        
 





















 
 
year ended december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


operating activities:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net income (loss)
 
$
260
 
$
185
 
$
(412
)


adjustments to reconcile net income (loss) to net cash provided by (used in) operating activities:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


extraordinary (gain) loss on the acquisition of a business, net of tax
 
 
(4
)
 
1
 
 
(6
)


gain on the consolidation of a variable interest entity
 
 
(12
)
 
—
 
 
—
 


equity in income of investment in unconsolidated affiliates
 
 
(8
)
 
(24
)
 
(3
)


dividends received from unconsolidated affiliates
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
11
 


depreciation and amortization
 
 
416
 
 
382
 
 
420
 


provision for (gains) losses on accounts receivable
 
 
(4
)
 
6
 
 
9
 


(gain) loss on disposal of businesses/assets, net
 
 
(38
)
 
8
 
 
(2
)


loss on early extinguishment of debt
 
 
7
 
 
37
 
 
21
 


noncash interest expense
 
 
51
 
 
40
 
 
39
 


deferred income taxes
 
 
40
 
 
45
 
 
68
 


noncash impairment charge
 
 
60
 
 
2
 
 
13
 


noncash (gain) loss on foreign currency transactions
 
 
(32
)
 
22
 
 
(26
)


noncash compensation
 
 
22
 
 
24
 
 
16
 


portion of insurance settlement representing cash provided by investing activities
 
 
—
 
 
(34
)
 
—
 


other, net
 
 
(1
)
 
1
 
 
1
 


changes in operating assets and liabilities:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


accounts and notes receivable
 
 
(121
)
 
(183
)
 
(88
)


accounts receivable from a/r programs
 
 
—
 
 
(254
)
 
—
 


inventories
 
 
(161
)
 
(207
)
 
351
 


prepaid expenses
 
 
(4
)
 
(2
)
 
5
 


other current assets
 
 
(87
)
 
(1
)
 
(6
)


other noncurrent assets
 
 
2
 
 
(102
)
 
(32
)


accounts payable
 
 
13
 
 
97
 
 
4
 


accrued liabilities
 
 
108
 
 
(32
)
 
5
 


other noncurrent liabilities
 
 
(75
)
 
(57
)
 
32
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net cash provided by (used in) operating activities
 
 
432
 
 
(46
)
 
420
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


investing activities:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


capital expenditures
 
 
(330
)
 
(236
)
 
(189
)


proceeds from settlements treated as reimbursement of capital expenditures
 
 
3
 
 
34
 
 
—
 


acquisition of businesses, net of cash acquired and post-closing adjustments
 
 
(34
)
 
—
 
 
(31
)


cash assumed in connection with the initial consolidation of a variable interest entity
 
 
28
 
 
14
 
 
—
 


proceeds from sale of businesses/assets
 
 
48
 
 
2
 
 
5
 


decrease (increase) in receivable from affiliate
 
 
(57
)
 
(57
)
 
(7
)


investment in unconsolidated affiliates
 
 
(26
)
 
(27
)
 
(15
)


cash received from unconsolidated affiliates
 
 
32
 
 
31
 
 
22
 


other, net
 
 
(1
)
 
1
 
 
3
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net cash used in investing activities
 
 
(337
)
 
(238
)
 
(212
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 

   

   
  
(continued)

f-13




 

table of contents

 
huntsman international llc and subsidiaries            consolidated statements of cash flows (continued)            (dollars in millions)        
 





















 
 
year ended december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


financing activities:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net repayments under revolving loan facilities
 
$
(2
)
$
(6
)
$
(14
)


revolving loan facility from a/r programs
 
 
—
 
 
254
 
 
—
 


net borrowings (repayments) on overdraft facilities
 
 
9
 
 
(2
)
 
(12
)


repayments of short-term debt
 
 
(187
)
 
(175
)
 
(13
)


borrowings on short-term debt
 
 
162
 
 
212
 
 
—
 


repayments of long-term debt
 
 
(408
)
 
(1,207
)
 
(542
)


proceeds from issuance of long-term debt
 
 
98
 
 
923
 
 
880
 


repayments of notes payable to affiliate
 
 
(105
)
 
(125
)
 
(403
)


proceeds from notes payable to affiliate
 
 
105
 
 
110
 
 
529
 


repayments of notes payable
 
 
(34
)
 
(53
)
 
(63
)


borrowings on notes payable
 
 
35
 
 
46
 
 
64
 


debt issuance costs paid
 
 
(7
)
 
(29
)
 
(5
)


call premiums related to early extinguishment of debt
 
 
(6
)
 
(28
)
 
(14
)


contribution from parent
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
236
 


dividends paid to parent
 
 
(79
)
 
—
 
 
(23
)


dividends paid to noncontrolling interest
 
 
(9
)
 
—
 
 
—
 


excess tax benefit related to stock-based compensation
 
 
10
 
 
4
 
 
—
 


other, net
 
 
—
 
 
(2
)
 
(1
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net cash (used in) provided by financing activities
 
 
(418
)
 
(78
)
 
619
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


effect of exchange rate changes on cash
 
 
(7
)
 
4
 
 
5
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


(decrease) increase in cash and cash equivalents
 
 
(330
)
 
(358
)
 
832
 


cash and cash equivalents at beginning of period
 
 
561
 
 
919
 
 
87
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


cash and cash equivalents at end of period
 
$
231
 
$
561
 
$
919
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


supplemental cash flow information:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


cash paid for interest
 
$
205
 
$
194
 
$
221
 


cash paid for income taxes
 
 
44
 
 
32
 
 
27
 



 
during
2011, 2010 and 2009, the amount of capital expenditures in accounts payable increased (decreased) by $16, $14 and $(13), respectively. during the years ended 2011, 2010 and 2009,
huntsman corporation contributed $22, $24 and $16, respectively to stock based compensation. 
   

   
  
see accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements. 

f-14






 









































table of contents 

 

 
huntsman corporation and subsidiaries            huntsman international llc and subsidiaries            notes to consolidated financial statements    


1. general  

definitions  

for convenience in this report, the terms "company," "our" or "we" may be used to refer to huntsman corporation and, unless the context
otherwise requires, its subsidiaries and predecessors. any references to our "company" "we" "us" or "our" as of a date prior to october 19, 2004 (the date of our company's formation) are to
huntsman holdings, llc and its subsidiaries (including their respective predecessors). in this report, "huntsman international" refers to huntsman international llc (our 100% owned subsidiary) and,
unless the context otherwise requires, its subsidiaries; "hps" refers to huntsman polyurethanes shanghai ltd. (our consolidated splitting joint
venture with shanghai chlor-alkali chemical company, ltd); and "slic" refers to shanghai liengheng isocyanate company (our unconsolidated manufacturing joint venture with basf ag and three
chinese chemical companies). 

in
this report, we may use, without definition, the common names of competitors or other industry participants. we may also use the common names or abbreviations for certain chemicals or
products. 

description of business  

we are a global manufacturer of differentiated organic chemical products and of inorganic chemical products. our products comprise a
broad range of chemicals and formulations, which we market globally to a diversified group of consumer and industrial customers. our products are used in a wide range of applications, including those
in the adhesives, aerospace, automotive, construction products, durable and non-durable consumer products, electronics, medical, packaging, paints and coatings, power generation, refining,
synthetic fiber, textile chemicals and dye industries. we are a leading global producer in many of our key product lines, including mdi, amines, surfactants, maleic anhydride, epoxy-based polymer
formulations, textile chemicals, dyes and titanium dioxide. 

we
operate in five segments: polyurethanes, performance products, advanced materials, textile effects and pigments. our polyurethanes, performance products, advanced materials and
textile effects segments produce differentiated organic chemical products and our pigments segment produces inorganic chemical products. in a series of transactions beginning in 2006, we sold or
shutdown substantially all of our australian styrenics operations and our north american polymers and base chemicals operations. we report the results of these businesses as discontinued operations.
see "note 25. discontinued operations." 

company  

our company, a delaware corporation, was formed in 2004 to hold the huntsman businesses. jon m. huntsman founded the predecessor
to our company in 1970 as a small packaging company. since then, we have grown through a series of acquisitions and now own a global portfolio of businesses. 


currently,
we operate all of our businesses through huntsman international, our 100% owned subsidiary. huntsman international is a delaware limited liability company and was formed in
1999. 

f-15




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

1. general (continued) 

huntsman corporation and huntsman international financial statements  

except where otherwise indicated, these notes relate to the consolidated financial statements for both our company and huntsman
international. the differences between our financial statements and huntsman international's financial statements relate primarily to the following:



•purchase accounting recorded at our company for the 2003 step-acquisition of huntsman international holdings
llc, the former parent company of huntsman international that was merged into huntsman international in 2005; 
•the different capital structures; 
•a note payable from huntsman international to us; 
•(expenses) income associated with the terminated merger and related litigation;  
•the convertible notes issued in connection with our settlement agreement with apollo and hexion (the "apollo settlement
agreement"), which we repurchased on january 11, 2010 (see "note 14. debt"); and 
•the results of the texas bank litigation settlement agreement. 


2. summary of significant accounting policies  

allowance for doubtful trade receivables  

an allowance for doubtful trade receivables is estimated based on a combination of write-off history, aging analysis and
any specific, known troubled accounts. 

asset retirement obligations  

we accrue for asset retirement obligations, which consist primarily of landfill closure costs and asbestos abatement costs, in the
period in which the obligations are incurred. asset retirement obligations are accrued at estimated fair value. when the liability is initially recorded, we capitalize the cost by increasing the
carrying amount of the related long-lived asset. over time, the liability is accreted to its settlement value and the capitalized cost is depreciated over the useful life of the related
asset. upon settlement of the liability, we will recognize a gain or loss for
any difference between the settlement amount and the liability recorded. see "note 12. asset retirement obligations." 

carrying value of long-lived assets  

we review long-lived assets and all amortizable intangible assets for impairment whenever events or changes in
circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of these assets may not be recoverable. recoverability is based upon current and anticipated undiscounted cash flows, and we recognize an impairment
when such estimated cash flows are less than the carrying value of the asset. measurement of the amount of impairment, if any, is based upon the difference between carrying value and fair value. fair
value is generally estimated by discounting estimated future cash flows using a discount rate commensurate with the risks involved. see "note 11. restructuring, impairment and plant closing
costs." 

f-16




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

2. summary of significant accounting policies (continued) 

cash and cash equivalents  

we consider cash in checking accounts and cash in short-term highly liquid investments with remaining maturities of three
months or less at the date of purchase, to be cash and cash equivalents. cash flows from discontinued operations are not presented separately in the accompanying consolidated statements of cash flows. 

cost of goods sold  

we classify the costs of manufacturing and distributing our products as cost of goods sold. manufacturing costs include variable costs,
primarily raw materials and energy, and fixed expenses directly associated with production. manufacturing costs also include, among other things, plant site operating costs and overhead (including
depreciation), production planning and logistics costs, repair and maintenance costs, plant site purchasing costs, and engineering and technical support costs. distribution, freight and warehousing
costs are also included in cost of goods sold. 

derivatives and hedging activities  

all derivatives, whether designated in hedging relationships or not, are recorded on our balance sheet at fair value. if the derivative
is designated as a fair value hedge, the changes in the fair value of the derivative and the hedged items are recognized in earnings. if the derivative is designated as a cash flow hedge, changes in
the fair value of the derivative are recorded in accumulated other comprehensive (loss) income, to the extent effective, and will be recognized in the income statement when the hedged item affects
earnings. changes in the fair value of the hedge in the net investment of certain international operations are recorded in other comprehensive income, to the extent effective. the effectiveness of a
cash flow hedging relationship is established at the inception of the hedge, and after inception we perform effectiveness assessments at least every three months. a derivative designated as a cash
flow hedge is determined to be effective if the change in value of the hedge divided by the change in value of the hedged item is within a range of 80% to 125%. hedge ineffectiveness in a cash flow
hedge occurs only if the cumulative gain or loss on the derivative hedging instrument exceeds the cumulative change in the expected future cash flows on the hedged transaction. for a derivative that
does not qualify or has not been designated as a hedge, changes in fair value are recognized in earnings. 

environmental expenditures  

environmental related restoration and remediation costs are recorded as liabilities when site restoration and environmental remediation
and clean-up obligations are either known or considered probable and the related costs can be reasonably estimated. other environmental expenditures that are principally maintenance or
preventative in nature are recorded when expended and incurred and are expensed or capitalized as appropriate. see "note 20. environmental, health and safety matters." 

financial instruments  

the carrying amounts reported in the balance sheet for cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable and accounts payable approximate
fair value because of the immediate or short-term 

f-17




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 


2. summary of significant accounting policies (continued) 

maturity
of these financial instruments. the fair value of non-qualified employee benefit plan investments is estimated using prevailing market prices. the estimated fair values of our
long-term debt are based on quoted market prices for the identical liability when traded as an asset in an active market. 

foreign currency translation  

the accounts of our operating subsidiaries outside of the u.s., unless they are operating in highly inflationary economic environments,
consider the functional currency to be the currency of the economic environment in which they operate. accordingly, assets and liabilities are translated at rates prevailing at the balance sheet date.
revenues, expenses, gains and losses are translated at a weighted average rate for the period. cumulative translation adjustments are recorded to equity as a component of accumulated other
comprehensive (loss) income. 

if
a subsidiary operates in an economic environment that is considered to be highly inflationary (100% cumulative inflation over a three-year period), the u.s. dollar is
considered to be the functional currency and gains and losses from remeasurement to the u.s. dollar from the local currency are included in the statement of operations. where a subsidiary's operations
are effectively run, managed, financed and contracted in u.s. dollars, such as certain finance subsidiaries outside of the u.s., the u.s. dollar is considered to be the functional currency. 


foreign
currency transaction gains and losses are recorded in other operating (income) expense in the consolidated statements of operations and were net (losses) gains of $(3) million,
$(2) million and $13 million for the years ended december 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. 

income taxes  

we use the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. deferred income taxes reflect the net tax effects of temporary
differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial and tax reporting purposes. we evaluate deferred tax assets to determine whether it is more likely than not that they
will be realized. valuation allowances are reviewed on a tax jurisdiction basis to analyze whether there is sufficient positive or negative evidence to support a change in judgment about the
realizability of the related deferred tax assets for
each jurisdiction. these conclusions require significant judgment. in evaluating the objective evidence that historical results provide, we consider the cyclicality of businesses and cumulative income
or losses during the applicable period. cumulative losses incurred over the period limits our ability to consider other subjective evidence such as our projections for the future. changes in expected
future income in applicable jurisdictions could affect the realization of deferred tax assets in those jurisdictions. 


we
do not provide for income taxes or benefits on the undistributed earnings of our non-u.s. subsidiaries as earnings are reinvested and, in the opinion of management, will
continue to be reinvested indefinitely. 

accounting
for uncertainty in income taxes prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or
expected to be taken in a tax return. the application of income tax law is inherently complex. we are required to determine if an income tax position meets the criteria of
more-likely-than-not to be realized based 

f-18




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 


2. summary of significant accounting policies (continued) 

on
the merits of the position under tax law, in order to recognize an income tax benefit. this requires us to make many assumptions and judgments regarding the merits of income tax positions and the
application of income tax law. additionally, if a tax position meets the recognition criteria of more-likely-than-not we are required to make judgments and
assumptions to measure the amount of the tax benefits to recognize based on the probability of the amount of tax benefits that would be realized if the tax position was challenged by the taxing
authorities. interpretations and guidance surrounding income tax laws and regulations change over time. as a consequence, changes in assumptions and judgments can materially affect amounts recognized
in the consolidated financial statements. 

intangible assets and goodwill  

intangible assets are stated at cost (fair value at the time of acquisition) and are amortized using the straight-line
method over the estimated useful lives or the life of the related agreement as follows: 
 













patents and technology
 
5 - 30 years


trademarks
 
15 - 30 years


licenses and other agreements
 
5 - 15 years


other intangibles
 
5 - 15 years



 
goodwill
represents costs in excess of fair values assigned to the underlying net assets of acquired businesses. goodwill is not subject to any method of amortization, but is tested for
impairment annually (at the beginning of the third quarter) and when events and circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying
amount. when the fair value is less than the carrying value of the related reporting unit, we are required to reduce the amount of goodwill through a charge to earnings. fair value is estimated using
the market approach, as well as the income approach based on discounted cash flow projections. goodwill has been assigned to reporting units for purposes of impairment testing. 

inventories  

inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market, with cost determined using lifo, first-in first-out, and
average costs methods for different components of inventory. 

investment in unconsolidated affiliates  


investments in companies in which we exercise significant influence, but do not control, are accounted for using the equity method.
investments in companies in which we do not exercise significant influence are accounted for using the cost method. 

legal costs  

we expense legal costs, including those legal costs incurred in connection with a loss contingency, as incurred. 

f-19




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

2. summary of significant accounting policies (continued) 

net income (loss) per share attributable to huntsman corporation  

basic income (loss) per share excludes dilution and is computed by dividing net income (loss) attributable to huntsman corporation
common stockholders by the weighted average number of shares outstanding during the period. diluted income per share reflects all potential dilutive common shares outstanding during the period and is
computed by dividing net income available to huntsman corporation common stockholders by the weighted average number of shares outstanding during the period increased by the number of additional
shares that would have been outstanding as dilutive securities. 

on
december 23, 2008, we issued the convertible notes in an aggregate principal amount of $250 million. prior to their repurchase, the convertible notes were convertible
into common stock at a conversion price of $7.857 per share, subject to certain anti-dilution adjustments. on january 11, 2010, we repurchased the entire $250 million
principal amount of the convertible notes for approximately $382 million. see "note 14. debt." 

basic
and diluted income (loss) per share is calculated as follows (in millions): 
 





















 
 
year ended december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


numerator:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


basic and diluted income from continuing operations:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


income (loss) from continuing operations attributable to huntsman corporation
 
$
244
 
$
(14
)
$
127
 


convertible notes interest expense, net of tax
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


income (loss) from continuing operations attributable huntsman corporation and assumed conversion
 
$
244
 
$
(14
)
$
127
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


basic and diluted net income:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net income attributable to huntsman corporation
 
$
247
 
$
27
 
$
114
 


convertible notes interest expense, net of tax
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net income attributable to huntsman corporation and assumed conversion
 
$
247
 
$
27
 
$
114
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


shares (denominator):
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


weighted average shares outstanding
 
 
237.6
 
 
236.0
 
 
233.9
 


dilutive securities:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


stock-based awards
 
 
4.1
 
 
—
 
 
4.4
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total outstanding and dilutive shares assuming conversion
 
 
241.7
 
 
236.0
 
 
238.3
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
additional
stock-based awards of 6.7 million, 11.5 million and 6.4 million weighted average equivalent shares of stock were outstanding during the years ended
december 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. in addition, the convertible notes would have had a weighted average effect of 0.9 million and 31.8 million shares of common stock
and interest expense, net of tax, of $1 million and $19 million would have been included as an adjustment to the numerator of the diluted income per share calculation for the years ended
december 31, 2010 and 2009, respectively. however, these stock-based 

f-20




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

2. summary of significant accounting policies (continued) 

awards
and the assumed conversion of the convertible notes were not included in the computation of diluted earnings per share for the respective periods mentioned because the effect would be
anti-dilutive. 

the
impact of the share repurchase program did not increase earnings per share for the year ended december 31, 2011. for more information on the share repurchase program, see
"note 21. huntsman corporation stockholders' equity—share repurchase program." 

other noncurrent assets  

other noncurrent assets consist primarily of spare parts, deferred debt issuance costs, the overfunded portion related to defined
benefit plans for employees and capitalized turnaround costs. debt issuance costs are amortized using the interest method over the term of the related debt. 


principles of consolidation  

our consolidated financial statements include the accounts of our wholly-owned and majority-owned subsidiaries and any variable
interest entities for which we are the primary beneficiary. all intercompany accounts and transactions have been eliminated, except for intercompany sales between continuing and discontinued
operations. 

property, plant and equipment  


property, plant and equipment is stated at cost less accumulated depreciation. depreciation is computed using the
straight-line method over the estimated useful lives or lease term as follows: 
 













buildings and equipment
 
10 - 33 years


plant and equipment
 
3 - 25 years


furniture, fixtures and leasehold improvements
 
5 - 20 years



 
interest
expense capitalized as part of plant and equipment was $2 million, $1 million and $3 million for the years ended december 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009,
respectively. 

periodic
maintenance and repairs applicable to major units of manufacturing facilities (a "turnaround") are accounted for on the deferral basis by capitalizing the costs of the
turnaround and amortizing the costs over the estimated period until the next turnaround. normal maintenance and repairs of plant and equipment are charged to expense as incurred. renewals, betterments
and major repairs that materially extend the useful life of the assets are capitalized, and the assets replaced, if any, are retired. 

reclassifications  

certain amounts in the consolidated financial statements for prior periods have been reclassified to conform with the current
presentation. beginning in 2011, we reclassified bank accepted drafts in china with maturities greater than 90 days from receipt from accounts receivable to other current assets. the amount of
bank accepted drafts reclassified from accounts receivable to other current assets at december 31, 2010 was $51 million. 

f-21




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

2. summary of significant accounting policies (continued) 

research and development  

research and development costs are expensed as incurred. 

revenue recognition  

we generate substantially all of our revenues through sales in the open market and long-term supply agreements. we
recognize revenue when it is realized or realizable and earned. revenue for product sales is recognized when a sales arrangement exists, risk and title to the product transfer to the customer,
collectability is reasonably assured and pricing is fixed or determinable. the transfer of risk and title to the product to the customer usually occurs at the time shipment is made. 

revenue
arrangements that contain multiple deliverables, which relate primarily to licensing of technology, are evaluated to determine whether the arrangements should be divided into
separate units of accounting and how the arrangement consideration should be measured and allocated among the separate units of accounting. 


securitization of accounts receivable  

under our a/r programs, we grant an undivided interest in certain of our trade receivables to the u.s. spe and the eu spe. this
undivided interest serves as security for the issuance of debt. the a/r programs provide for financing through a conduit program (in both u.s. dollars and euros). receivables transferred under the a/r
programs qualified as sales through december 31, 2009. upon adoption of new accounting guidance on january 1, 2010, transfers of accounts receivable under our a/r programs no longer met
the criteria for derecognition. accordingly, the amounts outstanding under our a/r programs are accounted for as secured borrowings beginning in 2010. see "note 14. debt—a/r
programs." 

stock-based compensation  

we measure the cost of employee services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments based on the grant-date
fair value of the award. that cost will be recognized over the period during which the employee is required to provide services in exchange for the award. see "note 22. stock-based compensation
plan." 

subsequent events  

we have evaluated material subsequent events through the date these financial statements were issued. 

use of estimates  

the preparation of financial statements in conformity with gaap requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the
reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the
reporting period. actual results could differ from those estimates. 

f-22






 




































 
table of contents 


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries  

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries  

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)  


2. summary of significant accounting policies (continued)  

recently issued accounting pronouncements  

accounting pronouncements adopted during 2011  

in october 2009, the financial accounting standards board ("fasb") issued accounting standards update ("asu")
no. 2009-13, revenue recognition (topic 605): multiple-deliverable revenue arrangements—a consensus of the fasb emerging issues task
force. this asu provides amendments to the criteria for separating consideration in multiple-deliverable arrangements. the amendments in this asu replace the term "fair value"
in the revenue allocation guidance with "selling price" to clarify that the allocation of revenue is based on entity-specific assumptions rather than assumptions of a marketplace participant and
establish a selling price hierarchy for determining the selling price of a deliverable. the amendments in this asu will eliminate the residual method of allocation and require that arrangement
consideration be allocated at the inception of the arrangement to all deliverables using the relative selling price method, and significantly expand the required disclosures related to
multiple-deliverable revenue arrangements. the amendments in this asu were effective prospectively for revenue arrangements entered into or materially modified in fiscal years beginning after
june 15, 2010. the initial adoption of this statement did not have a significant impact on our consolidated financial statements. 


in
december 2010, the fasb emerging issues task force issued asu no. 2010-29, business combinations (topic 805)—disclosure of
supplementary pro forma information for business combinations, which requires public entities that present comparative financial statements to disclose revenue and earnings of
the combined entity as though the business combination(s) that occurred during the current year had occurred at the beginning of the comparable prior annual reporting period only. the amendments in
this asu also expand the supplemental pro forma disclosures under topic 805 to include a description of the nature and amount of material, nonrecurring pro forma adjustments directly attributable to
the business combination included in the reported pro forma revenue and earnings. the amendments in this asu are effective for business combinations for which the acquisition date is on or after the
beginning of the first annual reporting period beginning on or after december 15, 2010. we complied with the disclosure requirements of this standard in connection with our april 2, 2011
laffans acquisition and in connection with our april 1, 2011 consolidation of the sasol-huntsman joint venture. see "note 3. business combinations and dispositions" and "note 7.
variable interest entities." 

accounting pronouncements pending adoption in future periods  

in may 2011, the fasb issued asu no. 2011-04, fair value measurement (topic 820): amendments
to achieve common fair value measurement and disclosure requirements in u.s. gaap and ifrss, providing a consistent definition of fair value between u.s. gaap and
international financial reporting standards ("ifrss") as well as developing common requirements for measuring fair value and for disclosing information about fair value measurements in accordance with
u.s. gaap and ifrss. the amendments in this asu are to be applied prospectively and will be effective during interim and annual periods beginning after december 15, 2011. we do not
expect the adoption of the amendments in this asu to have a significant impact on our consolidated financial statements. 

f-23




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

2. summary of significant accounting policies (continued) 


in
june 2011, the fasb issued asu no. 2011-05, comprehensive income (topic 220): presentation of comprehensive income,
requiring entities to present net income and other comprehensive income in either a single continuous statement of comprehensive income or in two separate, but consecutive, statements of net income
and other comprehensive income. the option to present components of other comprehensive income as part of the statement of equity is eliminated. the amendments do not change the option to present
components of other comprehensive income either net of related tax effects or before related tax effects, with one amount shown for the aggregate income tax expense or benefit related to the total of
other comprehensive income components. the amendments in this asu should be applied retrospectively and will be effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those years, beginning after
december 15, 2011. we do not expect the adoption of the amendments in this asu to have a significant impact on our consolidated financial statements. 

in
september 2011, the fasb issued asu no. 2011-08, intangibles—goodwill and other (topic 350): testing goodwill for
impairment. the guidance in this asu is intended to reduce complexity and costs of the annual goodwill impairment test by providing entities with the option of performing a
qualitative assessment to determine whether further impairment testing is necessary. the amendments in this asu include examples of events and circumstances that might indicate that a reporting unit's
fair value is less than its carrying value. the amendments in this asu are effective for annual and interim goodwill impairment tests performed for fiscal years beginning after december 15,
2011. early adoption is permitted, including for annual and interim goodwill impairment tests performed as of a date before september 15, 2011, provided that the entity has not yet issued its
financial statements for the period that includes its annual test date. we did not early adopt the provisions of this asu for our annual impairment test on july 1 and do not expect the adoption
of the amendments in this asu to have a significant impact on our consolidated financial statements. 

3. business combinations and dispositions  

ema acquisition  

on december 30, 2011, we completed the acquisition of ema kimya sistemleri sanayi ve ticaret a.s. (the "ema acquisition"), an
mdi-based polyurethanes systems house in istanbul, turkey for approximately $11 million, net of cash acquired and including the repayment of assumed debt. we have accounted for the
ema acquisition using the acquisition method and transaction costs charged to expense associated with this acquisition were not significant. for purposes of a preliminary allocation of the acquisition
cost to assets acquired and liabilities assumed, we have assigned the excess of the acquisition cost over historical carrying values of $7 million to goodwill. this preliminary purchase price
allocation is likely to change once we analyze the fair value of tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed. net sales for the years ended december 31, 2011 and 2010
related to the business acquired were approximately $23 million and
$17 million, respectively, and net loss associated with this business was $3 million and nil, respectively, for the same periods. 

sale of stereolithography resin and digitalis® machine manufacturing businesses  


on november 1, 2011, our advanced materials division completed the sale of its stereolithography resin and
digitalis® machine manufacturing businesses to 3d systems corporation for $41 million in cash. the stereolithography business had revenues of approximately $7 million in 2010
and its products 

f-24




 


table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

3. business combinations and dispositions (continued) 

are
used primarily in three-dimensional part building systems. the digitalis® business is a stereolithography rapid manufacturing system previously under development by huntsman. in
connection with this sale, we recognized a pre-tax gain in the fourth quarter of 2011 of $34 million which was reflected in other operating income on the accompanying consolidated
statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss). we also derecognized $2 million of goodwill that was allocated to these businesses. 

laffans acquisition  

on april 2, 2011, we completed the acquisition of the chemical business of laffans petrochemicals limited, an amines and
surfactants manufacturer located in ankleshwar, india at an acquisition cost of approximately $23 million. the acquired business has been integrated into our performance products segment.
transaction costs charged to expense related to this acquisition were not significant. 


we
have accounted for the laffans acquisition using the acquisition method. as such, we analyzed the fair value of tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed. the
preliminary allocation of acquisition cost to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed is summarized as follows (dollars in millions): 
 















acquisition cost
 
$
23
 


 
 
 
 


fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed:
 
 
 
 


accounts receivable
 
$
10
 


inventories
 
 
2
 


other current assets
 
 
2
 


property, plant and equipment
 
 
14
 


accounts payable
 
 
(3
)


accrued liabilities
 
 
(1
)


other noncurrent liabilities
 
 
(1
)


 
 
 
 


total fair value of net assets acquired
 
$
23
 


 
 
 
 



 
the
acquisition cost allocation is preliminary pending final determination of the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, including final valuation of property, plant and
equipment, intangible assets and the determination of related deferred taxes. for purposes of this preliminary allocation of fair value, we have assigned any excess of the acquisition cost over
historical carrying values to
property, plant and equipment and no amounts have been allocated to goodwill. it is possible that changes to this allocation could occur. 

f-25




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

3. business combinations and dispositions (continued) 

if
this acquisition were to have occurred on january 1, 2010 the following estimated pro forma revenues and net income attributable to huntsman corporation and huntsman
international would have been reported (dollars in millions): 

huntsman corporation  
 


















 
 
pro forma 
 


 
 
year ended
(unaudited) 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 


revenues
 
$
11,235
 
$
9,301
 


net income attributable to huntsman corporation
 
 
248
 
 
28
 



 
huntsman international  
 


















 
 
pro forma 
 


 
 
year ended
(unaudited) 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 


revenues
 
$
11,235
 
$
9,301
 


net income attributable to huntsman international
 
 
254
 
 
181
 



 
textile effects acquisition  

on june 30, 2006, we acquired ciba's textile effects business and accounted for the textile effects acquisition using the
purchase method. as such, we analyzed the fair value of tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed and we determined the excess of fair value of net assets over cost. because the
fair value of the acquired assets and liabilities assumed exceeded the purchase price, the valuation of the long-lived assets acquired was reduced to zero. accordingly, no basis was
assigned to property, plant and equipment or any other non-current nonfinancial assets and the remaining excess was recorded as an extraordinary gain, net of taxes (which were not
applicable because the gain was recorded in purchase accounting). during 2011, 2010 and 2009, we recorded an additional extraordinary gain (loss) on the acquisition of $4 million, $(1) million
and $6 million, respectively, related to settlement of contingent purchase price consideration, the reversal of accruals for certain restructuring and employee termination costs recorded in
connection with the textile effects acquisition and a reimbursement by ciba of certain costs pursuant to the acquisition agreements. 

f-26




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

4. inventories  


inventories consisted of the following (dollars in millions): 
 


















 
 
december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 


raw materials and supplies
 
$
374
 
$
321
 


work in progress
 
 
92
 
 
99
 


finished goods
 
 
1,162
 
 
1,043
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
 
1,628
 
 
1,463
 


lifo reserves
 
 
(89
)
 
(67
)


 
 
 
 
 
 


net
 
$
1,539
 
$
1,396
 


 
 
 
 
 
 



 
as
of both december 31, 2011 and 2010, approximately 12% of inventories were recorded using the lifo cost method. 

in
the normal course of operations we, at times, exchange raw materials and finished goods with other companies for the purpose of reducing transportation costs. the net
non-monetary open exchange positions are valued at cost. the amounts included in inventory under non-monetary open exchange agreements receivable by us for both
december 31, 2011 and 2010 were $3 million. other open exchanges are settled in cash and result in a net deferred profit margin. the amounts under these open exchange agreements for both
december 31, 2011 and 2010 were nil. 

5. property, plant and equipment  



the cost and accumulated depreciation of property, plant and equipment were as follows (dollars in millions): 



huntsman corporation  


 


















 
 
december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 


land
 
$
148
 
$
148
 


buildings
 
 
629
 
 
624
 


plant and equipment
 
 
5,951
 
 
5,674
 


construction in progress
 
 
330
 
 
255
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
 
7,058
 
 
6,701
 


less accumulated depreciation
 
 
(3,436
)
 
(3,096
)


 
 
 
 
 
 


net
 
$
3,622
 
$
3,605
 


 
 
 
 
 
 



 
depreciation
expense for 2011, 2010 and 2009 was $398 million, $363 million and $394 million, respectively, of which nil, $1 million and $2 million
related to discontinued operations in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. 

f-27




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

5. property, plant and equipment (continued) 



huntsman international  


 


















 
 
december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 


land
 
$
148
 
$
148
 


buildings
 
 
629
 
 
624
 


plant and equipment
 
 
6,058
 
 
5,781
 


construction in progress
 
 
330
 
 
255
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
 
7,165
 
 
6,808
 


less accumulated depreciation
 
 
(3,655
)
 
(3,339
)


 
 
 
 
 
 


net
 
$
3,510
 
$
3,469
 


 
 
 
 
 
 



 
depreciation
expense for the years ended december 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 was $374 million, $340 million and $371 million, respectively, of which nil,
$1 million and $2 million related to discontinued operations in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. 

property,
plant and equipment includes gross assets acquired under capital leases of $2 million and $15 million at december 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively, and
related amounts included in accumulated depreciation were $1 million and $15 million at december 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. 


6. investment in unconsolidated affiliates  


our ownership percentage and investment in unconsolidated affiliates were as follows (dollars in millions): 
 


















 
 
december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 


equity method:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


sasol-huntsman gmbh and co. kg (50%)(1)
 
$
—
 
$
44
 


louisiana pigment company, l.p. (50%)
 
 
90
 
 
98
 


basf huntsman shanghai isocyanate investment bv (50%)(2)
 
 
79
 
 
65
 


international polyurethanes investments b.v. (45%)
 
 
17
 
 
16
 


jurong ningwu new materials development co., ltd. (30%)
 
 
10
 
 
5
 


others
 
 
1
 
 
1
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total equity method investments
 
 
197
 
 
229
 


cost method:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


international diol company (4.35%)
 
 
5
 
 
5
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total investments
 
$
202
 
$
234
 


 
 
 
 
 
 







 

 
(1)we
began consolidating sasol-huntsman as of april 1, 2011. see "note 7. variable interest entities."
(2)we
own 50% of basf huntsman shanghai isocyanate investment bv. basf huntsman shanghai isocyanate investment bv owns a 70% interest in slic,
thus giving us an indirect 35% interest in slic. 
 
f-28




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

6. investment in unconsolidated affiliates (continued) 


summarized
applicable financial information of sasol-huntsman as of december 31, 2011 and 2010 and for the years ended december 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 is
presented below (dollars in millions): 
 





















 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


current assets
 
$
—
 
$
55
 
 
 
 


noncurrent assets
 
 
—
 
 
123
 
 
 
 


current liabilities
 
 
—
 
 
22
 
 
 
 


noncurrent liabilities
 
 
—
 
 
83
 
 
 
 


revenues
 
 
40
(1)
 
108
 
$
68
 


gross profit
 
 
7
(1)
 
14
 
 
9
 


net income
 
 
(2
)(1)
 
10
 
 
3
 







 

 
(1)represents
activity for the period from january 1, 2011 to the date of consolidation on april 1, 2011. 
 


summarized
applicable financial information of our other unconsolidated affiliates as of december 31, 2011 and 2010 and for the years ended december 31,
2011, 2010 and 2009 is presented below (dollars in millions): 
 





















 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


assets
 
$
621
 
$
722
 
 
 
 


liabilities
 
 
285
 
 
306
 
 
 
 


revenues
 
 
954
 
 
936
 
$
593
 


net income
 
 
22
 
 
10
 
 
3
 



 
in
2008, we and our joint venture partner, the zamil group, formed arabian amines company, our ethyleneamines manufacturing joint venture in jubail, saudi arabia. arabian
amines company's funding requirements have been satisfied through a combination of debt and equity, with the equity already provided on a 50/50 basis by us and the zamil group. trial production
commenced in the second quarter of 2010, and from july 2010, arabian amines company generated significant revenues from the sale of product. the plant has an approximate annual capacity of
60 million pounds. we purchase and sell all of the production from this joint venture. arabian amines company was accounted for under the equity method during its development stage; we began
consolidating this joint venture beginning july 1, 2010. for more information, see "note 7. variable interest entities." 

during
2010, we recorded an immaterial non-recurring $18 million credit to equity income of investment in unconsolidated affiliates to appropriately reflect our
investment in the sasol-huntsman joint venture. this credit represented a cumulative correction of an error that was also individually immaterial in each year since our initial investment in the joint
venture in 1997. in connection with the expansion of the maleic anhydride capacity at our sasol-huntsman joint venture, a
vie reconsideration event occurred in the second quarter of 2011 when the plant expansion began production. as a result of our assessment, we concluded that the joint venture is a vie and that we are
the primary beneficiary. accordingly, we began consolidating this joint venture during the second quarter of 2011. for more information see "note 7. variable interest entities." 

f-29






 




































 
table of contents 


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries  

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries  

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)  

7. variable interest entities  



we evaluate our investments and transactions to identify vies for which we are the primary beneficiary. we hold a variable interest in the following four joint ventures for which we are
the primary beneficiary:



•rubicon llc manufactures products for our polyurethanes segment. the structure of the joint venture is such that
the total equity investment at risk is not sufficient to permit the joint venture to finance its activities without additional financial support. by virtue of the operating agreement with this joint
venture, we purchase a majority of the output, absorb a majority of the operating costs and provide a majority of the additional funding. 
•pacific iron products sdn bhd ("pacific iron products") manufactures products for our pigments segment. in this joint
venture we supply all the raw materials through a fixed cost supply contract, operate the manufacturing facility and market the products of the joint venture to third party customers. through a fixed
price raw materials supply contract with the joint venture we are exposed to the risk related to the fluctuation of raw material pricing. 
•arabian amines company manufactures products for our performance products segment. prior to july 1, 2010, this
joint venture was in the development stage and the total equity investment at risk was sufficient for the joint venture to finance its activities without additional support. therefore, arabian amines
company was accounted for under the equity method. in july 2010, arabian amines company exited the development stage, which triggered the reconsideration of arabian amines company as a vie. as
required in the operating agreement governing this joint venture, we purchase all of arabian amines company's production and sell it to our customers. substantially all of the joint venture's
activities are conducted on our behalf. accordingly, we concluded that we were the primary beneficiary and began consolidating arabian amines company beginning july 1, 2010.  
•sasol-huntsman is our 50/50 joint venture with sasol that owns and operates a maleic anhydride facility in moers, germany.
this joint venture manufactures products for our performance products segment. prior to april 1, 2011, we accounted for sasol-huntsman using the equity method. in april 2011, an expansion at
this facility began production, which triggered the reconsideration of this joint venture as a vie. the joint venture uses our technology and expertise, and we bear a disproportionate amount of risk
of loss due to a related-party loan to sasol-huntsman for which we bear the default risk. as a result, we concluded that we were the primary beneficiary and began consolidating sasol-huntsman
beginning april 1, 2011. 


creditors
of these entities have no recourse to our general credit, except in the event that we offer guarantees of specified indebtedness. as the primary beneficiary of these variable
interest entities at december 31, 2011, the joint ventures' assets, liabilities and results of operations are included in our consolidated financial statements. 

f-30




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

7. variable interest entities (continued) 


the
following table summarizes the carrying amount of rubicon llc, pacific iron products and arabian amines company's assets and liabilities included in our consolidated balance
sheet, before intercompany eliminations, as of december 31, 2011 and 2010 (dollars in millions): 
 


















 
 
december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 


current assets
 
$
86
 
$
90
 


property, plant and equipment, net
 
 
262
 
 
275
 


other noncurrent assets
 
 
61
 
 
56
 


deferred income taxes
 
 
45
 
 
40
 


intangible assets
 
 
6
 
 
7
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total assets
 
$
460
 
$
468
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


current liabilities
 
$
115
 
$
111
 


long-term debt
 
 
182
 
 
188
 


deferred income taxes
 
 
1
 
 
—
 


other noncurrent liabilities
 
 
108
 
 
109
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total liabilities
 
$
406
 
$
408
 


 
 
 
 
 
 



 
in
april 2011, arabian amines company settled a dispute with its third party contractors and received an amount totaling $11 million. of this $11 million settlement,
$8 million was related to damages incurred due to the delayed initial acceptance of the plant. this amount was recorded as other operating (income) expense in the consolidated statements of
operations and comprehensive (loss) income and included in the cash flows from operating activities in the consolidated statements of cash flows. the remaining $3 million of the settlement was
received for the reimbursement of capital expenditures for work left unfinished by the third party contractors. this amount was included in cash flows from investing activities in the consolidated
statements of cash flows. 

the
following table summarizes the fair value of sasol-huntsman's assets and liabilities as of april 1, 2011 recorded upon initial consolidation in our consolidated balance sheet
and the carrying 

f-31




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 


7. variable interest entities (continued) 

amounts
of such assets and liabilities as of december 31, 2011, before intercompany eliminations (dollars in millions): 
 


















 
 
december 31,
2011 
 
april 1,
2011 
 


current assets
 
$
54
 
$
61
 


property, plant and equipment, net
 
 
141
 
 
155
 


intangible assets
 
 
17
 
 
16
 


goodwill
 
 
15
 
 
17
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total assets
 
$
227
 
$
249
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


current liabilities
 
$
30
 
$
23
 


long-term debt
 
 
87
 
 
93
 


deferred income taxes
 
 
8
 
 
8
 


other noncurrent liabilities
 
 
2
 
 
7
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total liabilities
 
$
127
 
$
131
 


 
 
 
 
 
 



 
goodwill
of $17 million was recognized upon consolidation of sasol-huntsman, of which approximately $12 million is deductible for income tax purposes. the total amount of
goodwill changed approximately $2 million from the date of consolidation to december 31, 2011, due to a change in the foreign currency exchange rate. all other intangible assets are
being amortized over an average useful life of 18 years. 

sasol-huntsman
had revenues and earnings of $116 million and $7 million, respectively, for the period from the date of consolidation to december 31, 2011. if this
consolidation had occurred on january 1, 2010, the approximate pro forma revenues attributable to both our company and huntsman international would have been $11,259 million and
$9,337 million for 2011 and 2010, respectively. there would have been no impact to the combined earnings attributable to us or huntsman international excluding a one-time noncash
gain of approximately $12 million recognized upon consolidation included in other operating income in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive (loss) income. upon
consolidation we also recognized a one-time noncash income tax expense of approximately $2 million. the fair value of the noncontrolling interest was estimated to be
$61 million at april 1, 2011. the noncontrolling interest was valued at 50% of the fair value of the net assets as of april 1, 2011, as dictated by the ownership interest
percentages, adjusted for certain tax consequences only applicable to one parent. 

f-32




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

8. intangible assets  



the gross carrying amount and accumulated amortization of intangible assets were as follows (dollars in millions): 

huntsman corporation  
 






























 
 
december 31, 2011 
 
december 31, 2010 
 


 
 
carrying
amount 
 
accumulated
amortization 
 
net 
 
carrying
amount 
 
accumulated
amortization 
 
net 
 


patents, trademarks and technology
 
$
363
 
$
307
 
$
56
 
$
363
 
$
286
 
$
77
 


licenses and other agreements
 
 
39
 
 
14
 
 
25
 
 
25
 
 
12
 
 
13
 


non-compete agreements
 
 
2
 
 
2
 
 
—
 
 
2
 
 
2
 
 
—
 


other intangibles
 
 
40
 
 
30
 
 
10
 
 
69
 
 
54
 
 
15
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
$
444
 
$
353
 
$
91
 
$
459
 
$
354
 
$
105
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
amortization
expense was $29 million, $30 million and $34 million for the years ended december 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. 


estimated
future amortization expense for intangible assets over the next five years is as follows (dollars in millions): 
 















year ending december 31



 
 
 
 


2012
 
$
24
 


2013
 
 
20
 


2014
 
 
13
 


2015
 
 
5
 


2016
 
 
4
 



 
huntsman international  
 






























 
 
december 31, 2011 
 
december 31, 2010 
 


 
 
carrying
amount 
 
accumulated
amortization 
 
net 
 
carrying
amount 
 
accumulated
amortization 
 
net 
 


patents, trademarks and technology
 
$
363
 
$
307
 
$
56
 
$
363
 
$
286
 
$
77
 


licenses and other agreements
 
 
39
 
 
14
 
 
25
 
 
25
 
 
12
 
 
13
 


non-compete agreements
 
 
2
 
 
2
 
 
—
 
 
2
 
 
2
 
 
—
 


other intangibles
 
 
48
 
 
36
 
 
12
 
 
77
 
 
60
 
 
17
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
$
452
 
$
359
 
$
93
 
$
467
 
$
360
 
$
107
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
amortization
expense for huntsman international was $30 million, $30 million and $35 million for the years ended december 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009,
respectively. 

f-33




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 


8. intangible assets (continued) 

huntsman
international's estimated future amortization expense for intangible assets over the next five years is as follows (dollars in millions): 
 















year ending december 31



 
 
 
 


2012
 
$
24
 


2013
 
 
20
 


2014
 
 
13
 


2015
 
 
5
 


2016
 
 
4
 



 
9. other noncurrent assets  



other noncurrent assets consisted of the following (dollars in millions): 
 


















 
 
december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 


pension assets
 
$
100
 
$
75
 


debt issuance costs
 
 
31
 
 
33
 


capitalized turnaround costs
 
 
141
 
 
164
 


spare parts inventory
 
 
89
 
 
81
 


catalyst assets
 
 
23
 
 
21
 


deposits
 
 
31
 
 
55
 


other
 
 
67
 
 
66
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
$
482
 
$
495
 


 
 
 
 
 
 



 
amortization
expense of catalyst assets for the years ended december 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 was $12 million, $12 million and $14 million, respectively. 

f-34




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 


10. accrued liabilities  


accrued liabilities consisted of the following (dollars in millions): 

huntsman corporation  
 


















 
 
december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 


payroll and related costs
 
$
158
 
$
166
 


interest
 
 
49
 
 
40
 


volume and rebate accruals
 
 
91
 
 
86
 


income taxes
 
 
46
 
 
33
 


taxes other than income taxes
 
 
61
 
 
77
 


restructuring and plant closing costs
 
 
91
 
 
47
 


environmental accruals
 
 
7
 
 
13
 


pension liabilities
 
 
12
 
 
11
 


other postretirement benefits
 
 
12
 
 
12
 


self-insured casualty loss reserves
 
 
13
 
 
17
 


deferred revenue
 
 
28
 
 
5
 


legal reserve
 
 
15
 
 
—
 


other miscellaneous accruals
 
 
112
 
 
121
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
$
695
 
$
628
 


 
 
 
 
 
 



 
huntsman international  
 


















 
 
december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 


payroll and related costs
 
$
158
 
$
166
 


interest
 
 
49
 
 
40
 


volume and rebate accruals
 
 
91
 
 
86
 


income taxes
 
 
46
 
 
33
 


taxes other than income taxes
 
 
61
 
 
77
 


restructuring and plant closing costs
 
 
91
 
 
47
 


environmental accruals
 
 
7
 
 
13
 


pension liabilities
 
 
12
 
 
11
 


other postretirement benefits
 
 
12
 
 
12
 


self-insured casualty loss reserves
 
 
13
 
 
17
 


deferred revenue
 
 
28
 
 
5
 


legal reserve
 
 
15
 
 
—
 


other miscellaneous accruals
 
 
111
 
 
119
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
$
694
 
$
626
 


 
 
 
 
 
 



 
f-35






 




































 
table of contents 


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries  

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries  

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)  

11. restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs  



as of december 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009, accrued restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs by type of cost and initiative consisted of the following (dollars in millions): 
 



























 
 
workforce
reductions(1) 
 
demolition and
decommissioning 
 
non-cancelable
lease costs 
 
other
restructuring
costs 
 
total(2) 
 


accrued liabilities as of january 1, 2009
 
$
68
 
$
2
 
$
2
 
$
3
 
$
75
 


adjustment to textile effects opening balance sheet liabilities
 
 
(5
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(5
)


2009 charges for 2006 initiatives
 
 
—
 
 
1
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
1
 


2009 charges for 2008 initiatives
 
 
5
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
5
 


2009 charges for 2009 initiatives
 
 
56
 
 
8
 
 
—
 
 
14
 
 
78
 


reversal of reserves no longer required
 
 
(8
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(8
)


2009 payments for 2005 and prior initiatives
 
 
(5
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(5
)


2009 payments for 2006 initiatives
 
 
(28
)
 
(1
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(29
)


2009 payments for 2008 initiatives
 
 
(17
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(17
)


2009 payments for 2009 initiatives
 
 
(32
)
 
(8
)
 
—
 
 
(12
)
 
(52
)


net activity of discontinued operations
 
 
26
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
8
 
 
34
 


foreign currency effect on reserve balance
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(2
)
 
(2
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


accrued liabilities as of december 31, 2009
 
 
60
 
 
2
 
 
2
 
 
11
 
 
75
 


2010 charges for 2005 and prior initiatives
 
 
1
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
1
 


2010 charges for 2008 initiatives
 
 
1
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
1
 


2010 charges for 2009 initiatives
 
 
4
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
5
 
 
9
 


2010 charges for 2010 initiatives
 
 
22
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
1
 
 
23
 


reversal of reserves no longer required
 
 
(6
)
 
—
 
 
(1
)
 
—
 
 
(7
)


2010 payments for 2005 and prior initiatives
 
 
(1
)
 
(1
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(2
)


2010 payments for 2006 initiatives
 
 
(3
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(3
)


2010 payments for 2008 initiatives
 
 
(7
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(7
)


2010 payments for 2009 initiatives
 
 
(11
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(5
)
 
(16
)


2010 payments for 2010 initiatives
 
 
(1
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(2
)
 
(3
)


net activity of discontinued operations
 
 
(26
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(26
)


foreign currency effect on liability balance
 
 
3
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
1
 
 
4
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


accrued liabilities as of december 31, 2010
 
 
36
 
 
1
 
 
1
 
 
11
 
 
49
 


2011 charges for 2006 and prior initiatives
 
 
1
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
1
 


2011 charges for 2009 initiatives
 
 
1
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
6
 
 
7
 


2011 charges for 2010 initiatives
 
 
2
 
 
2
 
 
10
 
 
1
 
 
15
 


2011 charges for 2011 initiatives
 
 
87
 
 
—
 
 
1
 
 
1
 
 
89
 


reversal of reserves no longer required
 
 
(5
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(5
)


2011 payments for 2006 and prior initiatives
 
 
(1
)
 
—
 
 
(1
)
 
(1
)
 
(3
)


2011 payments for 2008 initiatives
 
 
(2
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(2
)


2011 payments for 2009 initiatives
 
 
(6
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(6
)
 
(12
)


2011 payments for 2010 initiatives
 
 
(17
)
 
(3
)
 
—
 
 
(1
)
 
(21
)


2011 payments for 2011 initiatives
 
 
(13
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(1
)
 
(14
)


net activity of discontinued operations
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(2
)
 
(2
)


foreign currency effect on liability balance
 
 
(10
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(10
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


accrued liabilities as of december 31, 2011
 
$
73
 
$
—
 
$
11
 
$
8
 
$
92
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 







 

 
(1)the
total workforce reduction reserves of $73 million relate to the termination of 699 positions, of which 650 positions had not been terminated as
of december 31, 2011.
(2)accrued
liabilities remaining at december 31, 2011 and 2010 by year of initiatives were as follows (dollars in millions): 
 



















 
 
december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 


2006 initiatives and prior
 
$
2
 
$
4
 


2008 initiatives
 
 
—
 
 
1
 


2009 initiatives
 
 
11
 
 
20
 


2010 initiatives
 
 
16
 
 
24
 


2011 initiatives
 
 
63
 
 
—
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
$
92
 
$
49
 


 
 
 
 
 
 



 


 
f-36




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

11. restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs (continued) 


details with respect to our reserves for restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs are provided below by segment and initiative (dollars
in millions): 
 




































 
 
polyurethanes 
 
performance
products 
 
advanced
materials 
 
textile
effects 
 
pigments 
 
discontinued
operations 
 
corporate
& other 
 
total 
 


accrued liabilities as of january 1, 2009
 
$
3
 
$
1
 
$
1
 
$
63
 
$
7
 
$
—
 
$
—
 
$
75
 


adjustment to textile effects opening balance sheet liabilities
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(5
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(5
)


2009 charges for 2006 initiatives
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
1
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
1
 


2009 charges for 2008 initiatives
 
 
1
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
2
 
 
2
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
5
 


2009 charges for 2009 initiatives
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
12
 
 
10
 
 
45
 
 
—
 
 
11
 
 
78
 


reversal of reserves no longer required
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(7
)
 
(1
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(8
)


2009 payments for 2005 and prior initiatives
 
 
(2
)
 
(1
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(2
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(5
)


2009 payments for 2006 initiatives
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(29
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(29
)


2009 payments for 2008 initiatives
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(13
)
 
(4
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(17
)


2009 payments for 2009 initiatives
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(6
)
 
(4
)
 
(35
)
 
—
 
 
(7
)
 
(52
)


net activity of discontinued operations
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
34
 
 
—
 
 
34
 


foreign currency effect on liability balance
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(1
)
 
(1
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(2
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


accrued liabilities as of december 31, 2009
 
 
2
 
 
—
 
 
7
 
 
17
 
 
11
 
 
34
 
 
4
 
 
75
 


2010 charges for 2005 initiatives
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
1
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
1
 


2010 charges for 2008 initiatives
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
1
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
1
 


2010 charges for 2009 initiatives
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
1
 
 
—
 
 
8
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
9
 


2010 charges for 2010 initiatives
 
 
—
 
 
2
 
 
—
 
 
15
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
6
 
 
23
 


reversal of reserves no longer required
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(3
)
 
(1
)
 
(2
)
 
—
 
 
(1
)
 
(7
)


2010 payments for 2005 initiatives
 
 
(1
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(1
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(2
)


2010 payments for 2006 initiatives
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(3
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(3
)


2010 payments for 2008 initiatives
 
 
(1
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(5
)
 
(1
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(7
)


2010 payments for 2009 initiatives
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(3
)
 
(2
)
 
(8
)
 
—
 
 
(3
)
 
(16
)


2010 payments for 2010 initiatives
 
 
—
 
 
(1
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(2
)
 
(3
)


net activity of discontinued operations
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(26
)
 
—
 
 
(26
)


foreign currency effect on liability balance
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
3
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
1
 
 
4
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


accrued liabilities as of december 31, 2010
 
 
—
 
 
1
 
 
2
 
 
25
 
 
8
 
 
8
 
 
5
 
 
49
 


2011 charges for 2006 and prior initiatives
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
1
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
1
 


2011 charges for 2009 initiatives
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
7
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
7
 


2011 charges for 2010 initiatives
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
13
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
2
 
 
15
 


2011 charges for 2011 initiatives
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
21
 
 
65
 
 
3
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
89
 


reversal of reserves no longer required
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(1
)
 
(4
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(5
)


2011 payments for 2006 and prior initiatives
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(2
)
 
(1
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(3
)


2011 payments for 2008 initiatives
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(1
)
 
(1
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(2
)


2011 payments for 2009 initiatives
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(1
)
 
—
 
 
(11
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(12
)


2011 payments for 2010 initiatives
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(15
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(6
)
 
(21
)


2011 payments for 2011 initiatives
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(7
)
 
(5
)
 
(2
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(14
)


net activity of discontinued operations
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(2
)
 
—
 
 
(2
)


foreign currency effect on liability balance
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(2
)
 
(8
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(10
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


accrued liabilities as of december 31, 2011
 
$
—
 
$
1
 
$
12
 
$
69
 
$
3
 
$
6
 
$
1
 
$
92
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


current portion of restructuring reserves
 
$
—
 
$
1
 
$
11
 
$
69
 
$
3
 
$
6
 
$
1
 
$
91
 


long-term portion of restructuring reserve
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
1
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
1
 


estimated additional future charges for current restructuring projects
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


estimated additional charges within one year
 
$
—
 
$
—
 
$
1
 
$
10
 
$
6
 
$
—
 
$
—
 
$
17
 


estimated additional charges beyond one year
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
15
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
15
 



 
f-37




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

11. restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs (continued) 


details with respect to cash and non-cash restructuring charges for the years ended december 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 by
initiative are provided below (dollars in millions): 
 















cash charges:
 
 
 
 


2011 charges for 2006 and prior initiatives
 
$
1
 


2011 charges for 2009 initiatives
 
 
7
 


2011 charges for 2010 initiatives
 
 
15
 


2011 charges for 2011 initiatives
 
 
89
 


reversal of reserves no longer required
 
 
(5
)


non-cash charges
 
 
60
 


 
 
 
 


total 2011 restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs
 
$
167
 


 
 
 
 


cash charges:
 
 
 
 


2010 charges for 2005 and prior initiatives
 
$
1
 


2010 charges for 2008 initiatives
 
 
1
 


2010 charges for 2009 initiatives
 
 
9
 


2010 charges for 2010 initiatives
 
 
23
 


reversal of reserves no longer required
 
 
(7
)


non-cash charges
 
 
2
 


 
 
 
 


total 2010 restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs
 
$
29
 


 
 
 
 


cash charges:
 
 
 
 


2009 charges for 2006 initiatives
 
$
1
 


2009 charges for 2008 initiatives
 
 
5
 


2009 charges for 2009 initiatives
 
 
78
 


reversal of reserves no longer required
 
 
(8
)


non-cash charges
 
 
12
 


 
 
 
 


total 2009 restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs
 
$
88
 


 
 
 
 



 
2011 restructuring activities  

as of december 31, 2011, our advanced materials segment restructuring reserve consisted of $12 million related to
workforce reductions in connection with a reorganization of its global structure and relocation of its divisional headquarters from basel, switzerland to the woodlands, texas. during 2011, our
advanced materials segment recorded net charges of $20 million primarily related this activity. we expect to incur additional charges of $1 million through december 31, 2012
related to the relocation of our divisional headquarters from basel, switzerland to the woodlands, texas. 

on
september 27, 2011, we announced plans to implement a significant restructuring of our textile effects segment, including the closure of our production facilities and business
support offices in basel, switzerland, as part of an ongoing strategic program aimed at improving the textile effects segment's long-term global competitiveness. in connection with this
plan during 2011, we recorded a charge of $62 million for workforce reduction, a pension curtailment gain of $38 million and $53 million for the impairment of
long-lived assets at our basel, switzerland manufacturing facility. for purposes of 

f-38




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

11. restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs (continued) 

calculating
the impairment charge, the fair value of the basel, switzerland manufacturing facility was based on the discounted cash flows of that facility. we expect to incur additional restructuring
and plant closing charges of approximately $25 million through 2014. as of december 31, 2011, our textile effects segment restructuring reserve consisted of $69 million of which
$2 million related to opening balance sheet liabilities from the textile effects acquisition, $2 million related to workforce reductions at our production facility in langweid, germany,
$2 million related to the simplification of the commercial organization and optimization of our distribution network, $15 million related to the consolidation of manufacturing activities
and processes at our site in basel, switzerland, $47 million related to the closure of our production facilities and business support offices in basel, switzerland and $1 million related
to the consolidation of our north carolina sites. 

in
addition, during 2011, our textile effects segment recorded charges of $22 million of which $5 million related to simplification of the commercial organization and
optimization of our distribution network, $12 million related to non-workforce reductions incurred for the consolidation of our switzerland manufacturing facilities, and
$4 million related to the consolidation of our north carolina sites. we reversed charges of $4 million which were no longer required for workforce reductions at our production facility
in langweid, germany and the consolidation of manufacturing activities and processes at our site in basel, switzerland. 

as
of december 31, 2011, our pigments segment restructuring reserve consisted of $3 million primarily related to workforce reductions at our huelva, spain and scarlino,
italy plants. during 2011, our pigments segment recorded charges of $10 million of which $7 million related to the closure of our grimsby, u.k. plant and $3 million related to
workforce reductions at our umbogintwini, south africa plant. we expect to incur additional charges of $6 million through december 31, 2013, primarily related to the closure of our
grimsby, u.k. plant and workforce reductions at scarlino, italy. 

the
restructuring reserve related to discontinued operations as of december 31, 2011 of $6 million was associated with the closure of our australian styrenics business. for
more information, see "note 25. discontinued operations—australian styrenics business shutdown." 

as
of december 31, 2011, our corporate and other segment restructuring reserve consisted of $1 million primarily related to a reorganization and regional consolidation of
our transactional accounting activities. during 2011, we recorded charges of $2 million in corporate and other primarily related to workforce reductions in connection with this project. 

2010 restructuring activities  

as of december 31, 2010, our performance products segment restructuring reserve consisted of $1 million related to
workforce reductions in connection with a new performance products organizational structure. during 2010, we recorded charges of $2 million related to workforce reductions in connection with
this project. 

as
of december 31, 2010, our advanced materials segment restructuring reserve consisted of $2 million related to workforce reductions in connection with a reorganization
designed to implement a regional management structure. during 2010, we recorded net reversals of $2 million primarily related to workforce reductions in connection to this project. 

f-39




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

11. restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs (continued) 

as
of december 31, 2010, our textile effects segment restructuring reserve consisted of $25 million of which $2 million related to opening balance sheet liabilities
from the textile effects acquisition, $1 million related to the streamlining of the textile effects business into two global strategic business units as announced during the fourth quarter of
2008, $3 million related to workforce reductions at our
production facility in langweid, germany, and $19 million related to the consolidation of manufacturing activities and processes at our site in basel, switzerland. during 2010, our textile
effects segment recorded net charges of $15 million primarily related to the consolidation of manufacturing activities and processes at our site in basel, switzerland. 

as
of december 31, 2010, our pigments segment restructuring reserve consisted of $8 million primarily related to workforce reductions at our huelva, spain and scarlino,
italy plants. during 2010, our pigments segment recorded net charges of $7 million primarily related to the closure of our grimsby, u.k. plant. we expect to incur additional charges of
$8 million through december 31, 2012, primarily related to the closure of our grimsby, u.k. plant. 

the
restructuring reserve related to discontinued operations as of december 31, 2010 of $8 million was associated with the closure of our australian styrenics business. for
more information, see "note 25. discontinued operations—australian styrenics business shutdown." 

as
of december 31, 2010, our corporate and other segment restructuring reserve consisted of $5 million primarily related to a reorganization and regional consolidation of
our transactional accounting and purchasing activities. during 2010, we recorded net charges of $5 million in corporate and other primarily related to workforce reductions in connection with
these projects. 

2009 restructuring activities  

as of december 31, 2009, our polyurethanes segment restructuring reserve consisted of $2 million related to restructuring
initiatives at our rozenburg, the netherlands site (as announced in 2003). 

as
of december 31, 2009, our advanced materials segment restructuring reserve consisted of $7 million related to workforce reductions in connection with a reorganization
designed to implement a regional management structure. during 2009, we recorded charges of $12 million related to this reorganization project. 

as
of december 31, 2009, our textile effects segment restructuring reserve consisted of $17 million, of which $5 million related to opening balance sheet liabilities
from the textile effects acquisition, $5 million related to the streamlining of the textile effects business into two global strategic business units as announced during the fourth quarter of
2008, and $7 million related to workforce reductions at our production facility in langweid, germany. during 2009, we recorded charges of $13 million primarily related to workforce
reductions at our germany production facility. we also reversed accruals
of $7 million primarily related to the streamlining of the textile effects business and $5 million related to certain employee termination costs recorded in connection with the textile
effects acquisition. 

f-40






 




































 
table of contents 


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries  

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries  

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)  

11. restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs (continued)  


as of december 31, 2009, our pigments segment restructuring reserve consisted of $11 million primarily related to workforce reductions at our huelva, spain plant. during
2009, we recorded charges of $47 million, of which $29 million primarily related to the closure of our grimsby plant and $18 million primarily related to workforce reductions at
our huelva, spain plant. of the $29 million of charges at our grimsby plant, $14 million related to contract terminations, $7 million related to workforce reductions and
$8 million related to decommissioning. we also recorded non-cash charges of $4 million primarily related to a provision against engineering spare parts at our grimsby plant. 

as
of december 31, 2009, the restructuring reserve associated with discontinued operations of $34 million related to the closure of our former styrenics business in west
footscray, australia. during 2009, we recorded charges of $63 million in discontinued operations related to the closure of this business, of which $25 million related to workforce
reductions, $30 million related to estimated environmental remediation costs and $8 million related to contract termination costs. 

as
of december 31, 2009, our corporate and other segment restructuring reserve consisted of $4 million related to our 2009 fixed cost reduction project announced in the
first quarter of 2009. during 2009, we recorded charges of $11 million and non-cash charges of $3 million in corporate and other related to other aspects of our 2009 fixed
cost reduction project. 


12. asset retirement obligations  


asset retirement obligations consist primarily of landfill capping, closure and post-closure costs and asbestos abatement costs. we are legally required to perform capping
and closure and post-closure care on the landfills and asbestos abatement on certain of our premises. for each asset retirement obligation we recognized the estimated fair value of a
liability and capitalized the cost as part of the cost basis of the related asset. 


the
following table describes changes to our asset retirement obligation liabilities, all of which were recorded in other noncurrent liabilities on the accompanying balance sheets
(dollars in millions): 
 


















 
 
december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 


asset retirement obligation at beginning of year
 
$
24
 
$
21
 


accretion expense
 
 
2
 
 
1
 


liabilities incurred
 
 
—
 
 
1
 


liabilities assumed in connection with the consolidation of a variable interest entity
 
 
2
 
 
—
 


liabilities settled
 
 
(1
)
 
—
 


foreign currency effect on reserve balance
 
 
(1
)
 
1
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


asset retirement obligation at end of year
 
$
26
 
$
24
 


 
 
 
 
 
 



 
f-41




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 


13. other noncurrent liabilities  


other noncurrent liabilities consisted of the following (dollars in millions): 

huntsman corporation  
 


















 
 
december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 


pension liabilities
 
$
689
 
$
538
 


other postretirement benefits
 
 
122
 
 
124
 


environmental accruals
 
 
29
 
 
35
 


restructuring and plant closing costs
 
 
1
 
 
2
 


asset retirement obligations
 
 
26
 
 
24
 


employee benefit accrual
 
 
22
 
 
23
 


legal reserve
 
 
22
 
 
13
 


other
 
 
101
 
 
107
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
$
1,012
 
$
866
 


 
 
 
 
 
 



 
huntsman international  
 


















 
 
december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 


pension liabilities
 
$
689
 
$
538
 


other postretirement benefits
 
 
122
 
 
124
 


environmental accruals
 
 
29
 
 
35
 


restructuring and plant closing costs
 
 
1
 
 
2
 


asset retirement obligations
 
 
26
 
 
24
 


employee benefit accrual
 
 
22
 
 
23
 


legal reserve
 
 
22
 
 
13
 


other
 
 
92
 
 
93
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
$
1,003
 
$
852
 


 
 
 
 
 
 



 
f-42




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 


14. debt  


outstanding debt of consolidated entities consisted of the following (dollars in millions): 

huntsman corporation  
 


















 
 
december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 


senior credit facilities:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


term loans
 
$
1,696
 
$
1,688
 


amounts outstanding under a/r programs
 
 
237
 
 
238
 


senior notes
 
 
472
 
 
452
 


senior subordinated notes
 
 
976
 
 
1,279
 


hps (china) debt
 
 
167
 
 
188
 


variable interest entities
 
 
281
 
 
200
 


other
 
 
113
 
 
101
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total debt—excluding debt to affiliates
 
$
3,942
 
$
4,146
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total current portion of debt
 
$
212
 
$
519
 


long-term portion
 
 
3,730
 
 
3,627
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total debt—excluding debt to affiliates
 
$
3,942
 
$
4,146
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total debt—excluding debt to affiliates
 
$
3,942
 
$
4,146
 


notes payable to affiliates-noncurrent
 
 
4
 
 
4
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total debt
 
$
3,946
 
$
4,150
 


 
 
 
 
 
 



 
f-43




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

14. debt (continued) 

huntsman international  
 


















 
 
december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 


senior credit facilities:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


term loans
 
$
1,696
 
$
1,688
 


amounts outstanding under a/r programs
 
 
237
 
 
238
 


senior notes
 
 
472
 
 
452
 


subordinated notes
 
 
976
 
 
1,279
 


hps (china) debt
 
 
167
 
 
188
 


variable interest entities
 
 
281
 
 
200
 


other
 
 
113
 
 
101
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total debt—excluding debt to affiliates
 
$
3,942
 
$
4,146
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total current portion of debt
 
$
212
 
$
519
 


long-term portion
 
 
3,730
 
 
3,627
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total debt—excluding debt to affiliates
 
$
3,942
 
$
4,146
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total debt—excluding debt to affiliates
 
$
3,942
 
$
4,146
 


notes payable to affiliates-current
 
 
100
 
 
100
 


notes payable to affiliates-noncurrent
 
 
439
 
 
439
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total debt
 
$
4,481
 
$
4,685
 


 
 
 
 
 
 



 
direct and subsidiary debt  

huntsman corporation's direct debt and guarantee obligations consist of the following: guarantees of certain debt of hps (our chinese
mdi joint venture); a guarantee of certain debt and other obligations of certain of our australian subsidiaries; and certain indebtedness incurred from time to time to finance certain insurance
premiums. 

substantially
all of our other debt, including the facilities described below, has been incurred by our subsidiaries (primarily huntsman international); such subsidiary debt is
nonrecourse to us and we have no contractual obligation to fund our subsidiaries' respective operations. 

f-44




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

14. debt (continued) 

senior credit facilities  


as of december 31, 2011, our senior credit facilities consisted of our revolving facility, our term loan b, our term loan c and
our extended term loan b as follows (dollars in millions): 
 


























facility



 
 
committed
amount 
 
principal
outstanding 
 
carrying
value 
 
interest rate(2) 
 
maturity 
 


revolving facility
 
$
300
 
$
—
 
$
—
(1)
usd libor plus 3.00%
 
 
2014
(3)


term loan b
 
 
na
 
$
652
 
$
652
 
usd libor plus 1.50%
 
 
2014
(3)


term loan c
 
 
na
 
$
427
 
$
394
 
usd libor plus 2.25%
 
 
2016
(3)


extended term loan b
 
 
na
 
$
650
 
$
650
 
usd libor plus 2.50%
 
 
2017
(3)







 

 
(1)we
had no borrowings outstanding under our revolving facility; we had approximately $20 million (u.s. dollar equivalents) of letters of credit and
bank guarantees issued and outstanding under our revolving facility.
(2)the
applicable interest rate of the senior credit facilities is subject to certain secured leverage ratio thresholds. as of december 31, 2011, the
weighted average interest rate on our outstanding balances under the senior credit facilities was approximately 2%.
(3)the
maturity of the extended term loan b will accelerate if we do not repay, refinance or have a minimum level of liquidity available to enable us to
refinance or repay our outstanding 5.50% senior notes due 2016 at least three months prior to the maturity date of such notes. 
 
our
obligations under the senior credit facilities are guaranteed by our guarantor subsidiaries, which consist of substantially all of our domestic subsidiaries and
certain of our foreign subsidiaries, and are secured by a first priority lien on substantially all of our domestic property, plant and equipment, the stock of all of our material domestic subsidiaries
and certain foreign subsidiaries and pledges of intercompany notes between certain of our subsidiaries. 

on
march 7, 2011, huntsman international entered into a sixth amendment to its credit agreement. the amendment, among other things, extended $650 million of aggregate
principal of term loan b to a stated maturity of april 2017. as noted in the table above, after the amendment, as of december 31, 2011, we have $652 million outstanding on term loan b
with maturity of april 2014 and $650 million outstanding on extended term loan b with a maturity of april 2017. the amendment increased the interest rate margin with respect to extended term
loan b by 1.0%. extended term loan b will amortize in an amount equal to 1.0% of the principal amount, payable annually commencing on march 31, 2012. the amendment also grants huntsman
international the right to request an extension of the remaining principal balance of term loan b to the stated maturity date of extended term loan b. 


during
2010, we took the following actions with respect to our senior credit facilities:



•on march 9, huntsman international entered into the fifth amendment to the credit agreement which replaced certain
agent banks, extended the stated maturity of the revolving facility and amended certain other terms. 

f-45




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

14. debt (continued) 



•on april 26, we prepaid $124 million on term loan b and $40 million on term loan c with cash
accumulated in prior periods. we incurred a loss on early extinguishment of debt of $5 million. 
•on june 22, we prepaid $83 million on term loan b and $27 million on term loan c with proceeds from
the final settlement of insurance claims. we incurred a loss on early extinguishment of debt of $2 million. 
•we paid the annual scheduled repayment of $16 million on term loan b and $5 million on term loan c. 


a/r programs  

our a/r programs are structured so that we grant a participating undivided interest in certain of our trade receivables to the u.s. spe
and the eu spe. we retain the servicing rights and a retained interest in the securitized receivables. information regarding the a/r programs was as follows (monetary amounts in millions): 
 



















december 31, 2011 


facility



 
 
maturity 
 
maximum funding
availability(1) 
 
amount
outstanding 
 
interest rate(2)(3) 


u.s. a/r program
 
april 2014
 
$250
 
$90(4)
 
applicable rate plus 1.50% - 1.65%


eu a/r program
 
april 2014
 
€225 (approximately $291)
 
€114 (approximately $147)
 
applicable rate plus 2.0%



 
  
 



















december 31, 2010 


facility



 
 
maturity 
 
maximum funding
availability(1) 
 
amount
outstanding 
 
interest rate(2)(3) 


u.s. a/r program
 
october 2012
 
$125
 
$27.5
 
usd libor rate plus 3.75%


u.s. a/r program
 
october 2011
 
$125
 
$27.5
 
cp rate plus 3.50%


eu a/r program
 
october 2011
 
€225 (approximately $297)
 
€139 (approximately $183)
 
gbp libor rate, usd libor rate or euribor rate plus 3.75%







 

 
(1)the
amount of actual availability under the a/r programs may be lower based on the level of eligible receivables sold, changes in the credit ratings of our
customers, customer concentration levels, and certain characteristics of the accounts receivable being transferred, as defined in the applicable agreements.
(2)each
interest rate is defined in the applicable agreements. in addition, the u.s. spe and the eu spe are obligated to pay unused commitment fees to the
lenders based on the amount of each lender's commitment.
(3)applicable
rate for the u.s. a/r program is defined by the lender as either usd libor or cp rate. applicable rate for the eu a/r program is either gbp
libor, usd libor or euribor.
(4)as
of december 31, 2011 we had approximately $4 million (u.s. dollar equivalents) of letters of credit issued and outstanding under our u.s.
a/r program. 
 
f-46






 




































 
table of contents 


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries  

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries  

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)  

14. debt (continued)  


on april 15, 2011, huntsman international entered into an amendment to the eu a/r program. this amendment, among other things, extended the scheduled commitment termination date
of the program to april 2014, added an additional lender to the program and reduced the applicable margin on borrowings to 2.0%. 

on
april 18, 2011, huntsman international entered into an amendment to the u.s. a/r program. this amendment, among other things, extended the scheduled commitment termination date
of the program to april 2014, added an additional lender to the program and reduced the applicable margin on borrowings to a range of 1.50% to 1.65%. 

receivables
transferred under the a/r programs qualified as sales through december 31, 2009. upon adoption of new accounting guidance in 2010, transfers of accounts receivable
under our a/r programs no longer met the criteria for derecognition. accordingly, the amounts outstanding under our a/r programs are accounted for as secured borrowings as of january 1, 2010.
during 2009, we recorded a loss on the off-balance sheet accounts receivable securitization program of $23 million. 

as
of december 31, 2011 and december 31, 2010, $633 million and $552 million respectively, of accounts receivable were pledged as collateral under the a/r
programs. 

notes  

as of december 31, 2011, we had outstanding the following notes (monetary amounts in millions): 
 


















notes



 
 
maturity 
 
interest rate 
 
amount outstanding 


senior notes
 
june 2016
 
 
5.500
%(1)
$600 ($472 carrying value)


senior subordinated notes
 
march 2021
 
 
8.625
%
$530 ($543 carrying value)


senior subordinated notes
 
march 2020
 
 
8.625
%
$350


senior subordinated notes
 
january 2015
 
 
7.500
%
€64 (approximately $83)







 

 
(1)the
effective interest rate at issuance was 11.73%. 
 
our
notes are governed by indentures which impose certain limitations on huntsman international, including among other things limitations on the incurrence of debt, distributions,
certain restricted payments, asset sales, and affiliate transactions. the notes are unsecured obligations and are guaranteed by certain subsidiaries named as guarantors. 

f-47




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

14. debt (continued) 


redemption of notes and loss on early extinguishment of debt  

during the years ended december 31, 2011 and 2010, we redeemed or repurchased the following notes (monetary amounts in
millions): 
 





















date of redemption



 
 
notes 
 
principal amount of
notes redeemed 
 
amount paid
(excluding accrued
interest) 
 
loss on early
extinguishment
of debt 
 


three months ended december 31, 2011
 
6.875% senior subordinated notes due 2013
 
€70
(approximately $94)
 
€71
(approximately $96)
 
$
2
 


three months ended september 30, 2011
 
6.875% senior subordinated notes due 2013
 
€14
(approximately $19)
 
€14
(approximately $19)
 
$

—
 


three months ended september 30, 2011
 
7.5% senior subordinated notes due 2015
 
€12
(approximately $17)
 
€12
(approximately $17)
 
$

—
 


july 25, 2011
 
7.375% senior subordinated notes due 2015
 
$75
 
$77
 
$

2
 


january 18, 2011
 
7.375% senior subordinated notes due 2015
 
$100
 
$102
 
$

3
 


november 29, 2010
 
7.875% senior subordinated notes due 2014
 
$88
 
$92
 
$

3
 


november 26, 2010
 
7.875% senior subordinated notes due 2014
 
$100
 
$104
 
$

4
 


october 12, 2010
 
7.875% senior subordinated notes due 2014
 
$159
 
$165
 
$

7
 


september 27, 2010
 
6.875% senior subordinated notes due 2013
 
€132
(approximately $177)
 
€137
(approximately $183)
 
$

7
 


march 17, 2010
 
6.875% senior subordinated notes due 2013
 
€184
(approximately $253)
 
€189
(approximately $259)
 
$

7
 


march 17, 2010
 
7.50% senior subordinated notes due 2015
 
€59
(approximately $81)
 
€59
(approximately $81)
 
$

2
 


january 11, 2010(1)
 
7.00% convertible notes due 2018
 
$250
 
$382
 
$

146
 







 

 
(1)the
convertible notes due 2018 were issued to apollo in december 2008 as part of a settlement agreement with apollo. these convertible notes, which would
have matured on december 23, 2018, bore interest at the rate of 7% per year and were convertible into approximately 31.8 million shares of our common stock at any time by the holders. 
 
f-48




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

14. debt (continued) 

for the year ended december 31, 2011, we and huntsman international recorded a loss on early extinguishment of debt of $7 million.
for the year ended december 31, 2010, in connection with redemptions described in the table above, we recorded a loss on early extinguishment of debt of $176 million, and huntsman
international recorded a loss on early extinguishment of debt of $30 million. as noted in "—senior credit facilities" above, we and huntsman international also recognized a
$7 million loss on early extinguishment of debt in 2010 on the prepayment of $274 million of term loans. for the year ended december 31, 2009, we and huntsman international
recorded a loss on early extinguishment of debt of $21 million each. 

variable interest entity debt  

on april 1, 2011, we began consolidating sasol-huntsman which was previously accounted for under the equity method. see
"note 7. variable interest entities." sasol-huntsman has a facility agreement for a €77 million (approximately $100 million) term loan facility and a
€5 million (approximately $6 million) revolving facility. as of december 31, 2011, sasol-huntsman had no borrowings under the revolving facility and had
€73 million (approximately $95 million) outstanding under the term loan facility. the facility will be repaid over semiannual installments, with the final repayment
scheduled for december 2018. obligations under the facility agreement are secured by, among other things, first priority right on the property, plant and equipment of sasol-huntsman. 

as
of december 31, 2011, arabian amines company had $186 million outstanding under its loan commitments and debt financing arrangements which consisted of the
following:



•an sidf facility with sar 482 million (approximately $129 million) outstanding. repayment of the loan is to
be made in semiannual installments that are scheduled to begin in 2012, with final maturity in 2018. the loan is secured by a mortgage over the fixed assets of the project and is 100% guaranteed by
the zamil group, our 50% joint venture partner. 
•a multipurpose islamic term facility with $57 million outstanding. this facility is scheduled to be repaid in
semiannual installments, with final maturity in 2022. 


other debt  

during the year ended december 31, 2011, hps repaid $4 million and rmb 151 million (approximately
$24 million) of term loans and working capital loans under its secured facilities. in addition, during the year ended december 31, 2011, hps refinanced rmb 38 million
(approximately $6 million) in working capital loans and borrowed an additional rmb 145 million (approximately $23 million) in working capital loans with maturity in 2014. the
interest rate on these facilities is libor plus 0.48% for u.s. dollar borrowings and approximately 90% of the peoples bank of china rate for rmb borrowings. as of december 31, 2011, hps had
$12 million and rmb 474 million
(approximately $75 million) term loan and working capital borrowings under these secured facilities. as of december 31, 2011, the interest rate was approximately 1% for u.s. dollar
borrowings and 6% for rmb borrowings. we have guaranteed certain of these loans. 

as
of december 31, 2011, hps also had rmb 499 million (approximately $79 million) outstanding under a loan facility for working capital loans and discounting
commercial drafts with recourse, which is classified as current portion of debt on the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. interest is 

f-49




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 


14. debt (continued) 

calculated
using a peoples bank of china rate plus the applicable margin. the all-in rate as of december 31, 2011 was approximately 6%. 

as
of december 31, 2011, our australian subsidiary has a$26 million (approximately $26 million) outstanding under its credit facility. the credit facility is
comprised of a revolving facility with a$14 million (approximately $14 million) outstanding and a term facility with a$12 million (approximately $12 million) outstanding.
on september 1, 2011, our australian subsidiary entered into an amendment with the lender to modify certain terms of the credit facility. 


during
the third quarter of 2011, we incurred other debt related to the financing of our insurance premiums in connection with our annual renewal in july 2011. as of december 31,
2011, the outstanding amount of financed insurance premiums was $15 million, all of which was classified as current portion of debt on the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. 

note payable from huntsman international to huntsman corporation  

as of december 31, 2011, we had a loan of $535 million to our subsidiary, huntsman international. the intercompany note
is unsecured and $100 million of the outstanding amount is classified as current as of december 31, 2011 on the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. as of december 31, 2011,
under the terms of the intercompany note, huntsman international promises to pay us interest on the unpaid principal amount at a rate per annum based on the previous monthly average borrowing rate
obtained under our u.s. a/r program, less 10 basis points (provided that the rate shall not exceed an amount that is 25 basis points less than the monthly average borrowing rate obtained for the u.s.
libor-based borrowings under our revolving facility). 

compliance with covenants

we
believe that we are in compliance with the covenants contained in the agreements governing our material debt instruments, including our senior credit
facilities, our a/r programs and our notes. 

our
material financing arrangements contain certain covenants with which we must comply. a failure to comply with a covenant could result in a default under a financing arrangement if
not waived or amended. a default under these material financing arrangements generally allows debt holders the option to declare the underlying debt obligations immediately due and payable. 

furthermore,
certain of our material financing arrangements contain cross default and cross acceleration provisions under which a failure to comply with the covenants in one financing
arrangement may result in an event of default under another financing arrangement. 


our
senior credit facilities are subject to the leverage covenant which applies only to the revolving facility and is tested at the huntsman international level. the leverage covenant is
applicable only if borrowings, letters of credit or guarantees are outstanding under the revolving facility (cash collateralized letters of credit or guarantees are not deemed outstanding). the
leverage covenant is a net senior secured leverage ratio covenant which requires that huntsman international's ratio of senior secured debt to ebitda (as defined in the applicable agreement) is not
more than 3.75 to 1. 

f-50




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 


14. debt (continued) 

if
in the future huntsman international failed to comply with the leverage covenant, then we may not have access to liquidity under our revolving facility. if huntsman international
failed to comply with the leverage covenant at a time when we had uncollateralized loans or letters of credit outstanding under the revolving facility, huntsman international would be in default under
the senior credit facilities, and, unless huntsman international obtained a waiver or forbearance with respect to such default (as to which we can provide no assurance), huntsman international could
be required to pay off the balance of the senior credit facilities in full, and we may not have further access to such facilities. 


the
agreements governing our a/r programs also contain certain receivable performance metrics. any material failure to meet the applicable a/r programs' metrics in the future could lead
to an early termination event under the a/r programs, which could require us to cease our use of such facilities, prohibiting us from additional borrowings against our receivables or, at the
discretion of the lenders, requiring that we repay the a/r programs in full. an early termination event under the a/r programs would also constitute an event of default under our senior credit
facilities, which could require us to pay off the balance of the senior credit facilities in full and could result in the loss of our senior credit facilities. 


maturities  

the scheduled maturities of our debt (excluding debt to affiliates) by year as of december 31, 2011 are as follows (dollars in
millions): 
 















year ending december 31



 
 
 
 


2012
 
$
212
 


2013
 
 
86
 


2014
 
 
973
 


2015
 
 
135
 


2016
 
 
897
 


thereafter
 
 
1,639
 


 
 
 
 


 
 
$
3,942
 


 
 
 
 



 
15. derivative instruments and hedging activities  


we are exposed to market risks, such as changes in interest rates, foreign exchange rates and commodity pricing risks. from time to time, we enter into transactions, including
transactions involving
derivative instruments, to manage certain of these exposures. we also hedge our net investment in certain european operations. changes in the fair value of the hedge in the net investment of certain
european operations are recorded in accumulated other comprehensive (loss) income. 

interest rate risks

through
our borrowing activities, we are exposed to interest rate risk. such risk arises due to the structure of our debt portfolio, including the duration of
the portfolio and the mix of fixed and floating interest rates. actions taken to reduce interest rate risk include managing the mix and rate 

f-51




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

15. derivative instruments and hedging activities (continued) 

characteristics
of various interest bearing liabilities, as well as entering into interest rate derivative instruments. 

from
time to time, we may purchase interest rate swaps and/or interest rate collars to reduce the impact of changes in interest rates on our floating-rate
long-term debt. under interest rate swaps, we agree with other parties to exchange, at specified intervals, the difference between fixed-rate and floating-rate
interest amounts calculated by reference to an agreed notional principal amount. the collars entitle us to receive from the counterparties (major banks) the amounts, if any, by which our interest
payments on certain of our floating-rate borrowings exceed a certain rate, and require us to pay to the counterparties (major banks) the amount, if any, by which our interest payments on
certain of our floating-rate borrowings are less than a certain rate. 

on
december 9, 2009, we entered into a five-year interest rate contract to hedge the variability caused by monthly changes in cash flow due to associated changes in
libor under our senior credit facilities. the notional value of the contract is $50 million, and it has been designated as a cash flow hedge. the effective portion of the changes in the fair
value of the swap was recorded in other comprehensive loss. we will pay a fixed 2.6% on the hedge and receive the one-month libor rate. as of december 31, 2011 and 2010, the fair
value of the hedge was $(3) million and $(2) million, respectively, and was recorded in other noncurrent liabilities. 

on
january 19, 2010, we entered into an additional five-year interest rate contract to hedge the variability caused by monthly changes in cash flow due to associated
changes in libor
under our senior credit facilities. the notional value of the contract is $50 million, and it has been designated as a cash flow hedge. the effective portion of the changes in the fair value of
the swap was recorded as other comprehensive loss. we will pay a fixed 2.8% on the hedge and receive the one-month libor rate. as of december 31, 2011 and 2010, the fair value of
the hedge was $(3) million and $(2) million, respectively, and was recorded in other noncurrent liabilities. 

on
september 1, 2011, we entered into a $50 million forward interest rate contract that will begin in december 2014 with maturity in april 2017 and a $50 million
forward interest rate contract that will begin in january 2015 with maturity in april 2017. these two forward contracts are to hedge the variability caused by monthly changes in cash flow due to
associated changes in libor under our senior credit facilities once our existing interest rate hedges mature. these swaps are designated as a cash flow hedges and the effective portion of the changes
in the fair value of the swaps were recorded in other comprehensive income. both interest rate contracts will pay a fixed 2.5% on the hedge and receive the one-month libor rate once the
contracts begin in 2014 and 2015, respectively. as of december 31, 2011, the combined fair value of these two hedges was $(1) million and was recorded in other noncurrent liabilities on the
accompanying condensed consolidated balance sheets. 

in
2009, sasol-huntsman entered into derivative transactions to hedge the variable interest rate associated with its local credit facility. these derivative rate hedges include a
floating to fixed interest rate contract providing sasol-huntsman with euribor interest payments for a fixed payment of 3.62% and a cap for future periods with a strike price of 3.62%. in connection
with the consolidation of sasol-huntsman as of april 1, 2011, the interest rate contract is now included in our consolidated results. see "note 7. variable interest entities." the
notional amount of the hedge as of december 31, 2011 was €51 million (approximately $66 million) and the derivative transactions do not qualify for 

f-52




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

15. derivative instruments and hedging activities (continued) 

hedge
accounting. as of december 31, 2011, the fair value of this hedge was €(3) million (approximately $3 million) and was recorded in other noncurrent liabilities on
the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. for 2011 we recorded interest expense of €2 million (approximately $2 million) due to changes in the fair value of the swap. 


beginning
in 2009, arabian amines company entered into a 12-year floating to fixed interest rate contract providing for a receipt of libor interest payments for a fixed payment of 5.02%.
in connection with the consolidation of arabian amines company as of july 1, 2010, the interest rate contract is now included in our consolidated results. see "note 7. variable interest
entities." the notional amount of the swap as of december 31, 2011 was $38 million, and the interest rate contract is not designated as a cash flow hedge. as of december 31, 2011
and 2010, the fair value of the swap was $(6) million and $(5) million, respectively, and was recorded as other noncurrent liabilities on the
accompanying consolidated balance sheets. for 2011 and 2010, we recorded additional (reduction of) interest expense of $1 million and $(1) million, respectively, due to changes in fair value of
the swap. 

for
the years ended december 31, 2011 and 2010, the changes in accumulated other comprehensive (loss) income associated with these cash flow hedging activities was approximately
$4 million and $5 million, respectively. 

during
2012, accumulated other comprehensive (loss) income of nil is expected to be reclassified to earnings. the actual amount that will be reclassified to earnings over the next twelve
months may vary from this amount due to changing market conditions. we would be exposed to credit losses in the event of nonperformance by a counterparty to our derivative financial instruments. we
anticipate, however, that the counterparties will be able to fully satisfy their obligations under the contracts. market risk arises from changes in interest rates. 

foreign exchange rate risk

our
cash flows and earnings are subject to fluctuations due to exchange rate variation. our revenues and expenses are denominated in various currencies. we
enter into foreign currency derivative instruments to minimize the short-term impact of movements in foreign currency rates. where practicable, we generally net multicurrency cash balances
among our subsidiaries to help reduce exposure to foreign currency exchange rates. certain other exposures may be managed from time to time through financial market transactions, principally through
the purchase of spot or forward foreign exchange contracts (generally with maturities of three months or less). we do not hedge our currency exposures in a manner that would eliminate the effect of
changes in exchange rates on our cash flows and earnings. as of december 31, 2011 and 2010, we had approximately $263 million and $183 million notional amount (in u.s. dollar
equivalents) outstanding, respectively, in foreign currency contracts with a term of approximately one month. 

in
conjunction with the issuance of our 8.625% senior subordinated notes due 2020, we entered into cross-currency interest rate contracts with three counterparties. on march 17,
2010, we made payments of $350 million to these counterparties and received €255 million from these counterparties, and on maturity (march 15, 2015) we are
required to pay €255 million to these counterparties and will receive $350 million from these counterparties. on march 15 and september 15 of each year, we
will receive u.s. dollar interest payments of approximately $15 million (equivalent to an annual rate of 

f-53




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

15. derivative instruments and hedging activities (continued) 

8.625%)
and make interest payments of approximately €11 million (equivalent to an annual rate of approximately 8.41%). this swap is designated as a hedge of net investment for
financial reporting purposes. as of december 31, 2011 and 2010, the fair value of this swap was $27 million and $19 million, respectively, and was recorded as noncurrent assets in
our consolidated balance sheet. for 2011 and 2010, we recorded the effective portion of the changes in the fair value of $8 million and $7 million, respectively, in other comprehensive
income, and we recorded the ineffective portion of nil and $12 million, respectively, as a reduction to interest expense. on july 15, 2010, we changed the method of assessing the
effectiveness of this hedge from the spot method to the forward method, which we believe will reduce the ineffective portion and lower volatility in interest expense in future periods. 

a
portion of our debt is denominated in euros. we also finance certain of our non-u.s. subsidiaries with intercompany loans that are, in many cases, denominated in currencies
other than the entities' functional currency. we manage the net foreign currency exposure created by this debt through various means, including cross-currency swaps, the designation of certain
intercompany loans as permanent loans because they are not expected to be repaid in the foreseeable future ("permanent loans") and the designation of certain debt and swaps as net investment hedges. 

foreign
currency transaction gains and losses on intercompany loans that are not designated as permanent loans are recorded in earnings. foreign currency transaction gains and losses on
intercompany loans that are designated as permanent loans are recorded in other comprehensive income. from time to time, we review such designation of intercompany loans. 


we
review our non-u.s. dollar denominated debt and derivative instruments to determine the appropriate amounts designated as hedges. as of december 31, 2011, we have
designated approximately €319 million (approximately $412 million) of euro-denominated debt and cross-currency interest rate contracts as a hedge of our net
investment. for the years ended december 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009, the amount of gain (loss) recognized on the hedge of our net investment was $5 million, $34 million and $(5)
million, respectively, and was recorded in other comprehensive (loss) income. as of december 31, 2011, we had approximately €1,162 million (approximately
$1,503 million) in net euro assets. 

commodity prices risk  

our exposure to changing commodity prices is somewhat limited since the majority of our raw materials are acquired at posted or market
related prices, and sales prices for many of our finished products are at market related prices which are largely set on a monthly or quarterly basis in line with industry practice. consequently, we
do not generally hedge our commodity exposures. 

f-54






 




































 
table of contents 


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries  

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries  

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)  


16. fair value  


the fair values of our financial instruments were as follows (dollars in millions): 
 
























 
 
december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 


 
 
carrying
value 
 
estimated
fair value 
 
carrying
value 
 
estimated
fair value 
 


non-qualified employee benefit plan investments
 
$
12
 
$
12
 
$
11
 
$
11
 


cross-currency interest rate contacts
 
 
27
 
 
27
 
 
19
 
 
19
 


interest rate contracts
 
 
(17
)
 
(17
)
 
(9
)
 
(9
)


long-term debt (including current portion)
 
 
(3,942
)
 
(4,061
)
 
(4,146
)
 
(4,371
)



 
the
carrying amounts reported in the balance sheets for cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable and accounts payable approximate fair value because of the immediate or
short-term
maturity of these financial instruments. the fair value of nonqualified employee benefit plan investments is estimated using prevailing market prices. the estimated fair values of our
long-term debt are based on quoted market prices for the identical liability when traded as an asset in an active market. 


the
fair value estimates presented herein are based on pertinent information available to management as of december 31, 2011 and 2010. although management is not aware of any
factors that would significantly affect the estimated fair value amounts, such amounts have not been comprehensively revalued for purposes of these financial statements since december 31, 2011,
and current estimates of fair value may differ significantly from the amounts presented herein. 

the
following assets are measured at fair value on a recurring basis (dollars in millions): 
 
























 
 
 
 
fair value amounts using 
 


description



 
 
december 31,
2011 
 
quoted prices
in active
markets for
identical assets
(level 1) 
 
significant
other
observable
inputs
(level 2) 
 
significant
unobservable
inputs
(level 3) 
 


assets:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


available-for sale equity securities:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


equity mutual funds
 
$
12
 
$
12
 
$
—
 
$
—
 


derivatives:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


cross-currency interest rate contract(1)
 
 
27
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
27
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total assets
 
$
39
 
$
12
 
$
—
 
$
27
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


liabilities:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


derivatives:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


interest rate contracts(2)
 
$
(17
)
$
—
 
$
(17
)
$
—
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
f-55




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 


16. fair value (continued) 


 
























 
 
 
 
fair value amounts using 
 


description



 
 
december 31,
2010 
 
quoted prices
in active
markets for
identical assets
(level 1) 
 
significant
other
observable
inputs
(level 2) 
 
significant
unobservable
inputs
(level 3) 
 


assets:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


available-for sale equity securities:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


equity mutual funds
 
$
11
 
$
11
 
$
—
 
$
—
 


derivatives:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


cross-currency interest rate contract(1)
 
 
19
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
19
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total assets
 
$
30
 
$
11
 
$
—
 
$
19
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


liabilities:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


derivatives:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


interest rate contracts(2)
 
$
(9
)
$
—
 
$
(9
)
$
—
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 







 

 
(1)the
income approach is used to calculate the fair value of these instruments. fair value represents the present value of estimated future cash flows,
calculated using relevant interest rates, exchange rates, and yield curves at stated intervals.
(2)the
income approach is used to calculate the fair value of these instruments. fair value represents the present value of estimated future cash flows,
calculated using relevant interest rates and yield curves at stated intervals. 
 
during
the year ended december 31, 2011, no changes were made to the valuation techniques used to measure fair value. 


the
following table shows a reconciliation of beginning and ending balances for assets measured at fair value on a recurring basis using significant unobservable inputs (level 3)
(dollars in millions): 
 


















fair value measurements using significant unobservable inputs (level 3)



 
 
cross-currency
interest
rate contracts 
 
total 
 


beginning balance, january 1, 2011
 
$
19
 
$
19
 


total gains (losses):
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


included in earnings
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


included in other comprehensive income (loss)
 
 
8
 
 
8
 


purchases, issuances and settlements
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


ending balance, december 31, 2011
 
$
27
 
$
27
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


the amount of total gains (losses) for the period included in earnings attributable to the change in unrealized gains (losses) relating to assets still
held at december 31, 2011
 
$
—
 
$
—
 


 
 
 
 
 
 



 
f-56




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 


16. fair value (continued) 


 





















fair value measurements using significant unobservable inputs (level 3)



 
 
realized
interest in
securitized
receivables 
 
cross-currency
interest
rate contracts 
 
total 
 


beginning balance, january 1, 2010
 
$
262
 
$
—
 
$
262
 


total gains (losses):
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


included in earnings
 
 
—
 
 
12
 
 
12
 


included in other comprehensive income (loss)
 
 
—
 
 
7
 
 
7
 


purchases, issuances and settlements(1)
 
 
(262
)
 
—
 
 
(262
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


ending balance, december 31, 2010
 
$
—
 
$
19
 
$
19
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


the amount of total gains (losses) for the period included in earnings attributable to the change in unrealized gains (losses) relating to assets still
held at december 31, 2010
 
$
—
 
$
12
 
$
12
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 







 

 
(1)upon
adoption of asu 2009-16, transfers of our accounts receivable under our a/r programs no longer met the criteria for derecognition.
accordingly, beginning january 1, 2010, the amounts outstanding under the a/r programs were accounted for as secured borrowings and the retained interest in securitized receivables was no
longer relevant. 
 
gains
(realized and unrealized) included in earnings for 2011 and 2010 are reported in interest expense and other comprehensive income (loss) as follows (dollars in millions): 
 


















 
 
interest expense 
 
other
comprehensive
income (loss) 
 


2011
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total net gains included in earnings
 
$
—
 
$
—
 


changes in unrealized gains relating to assets still held at december 31, 2011
 
$
—
 
$
8
 



 
  
 


















 
 
interest expense 
 
other
comprehensive
income (loss) 
 


2010
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total net gains included in earnings
 
$
12
 
$
—
 


changes in unrealized gains relating to assets still held at december 31, 2010
 
$
12
 
$
7
 



 
17. employee benefit plans  

defined benefit and other postretirement benefit plans  

our employees participate in a trusteed, non-contributory defined benefit pension plan (the "plan") that covers
substantially all of our full-time u.s. employees. effective july 1, 2004, the plan formula for employees not covered by a collective bargaining agreement was converted to a cash
balance design. for represented employees, participation in the cash balance design is subject to the 

f-57




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

17. employee benefit plans (continued) 

terms
of negotiated contracts. for participating employees, benefits accrued under the prior formula were converted to opening cash balance accounts. the new cash balance benefit formula provides
annual pay credits from 4% to 12% of eligible pay, depending on age and service, plus accrued interest. participants in the plan on july 1, 2004 may be eligible for additional annual pay
credits from 1% to 8%, depending on their age and service as of that date, for up to five years. the conversion to the cash balance plan did not have a significant impact on the accrued benefit
liability, the funded status or ongoing pension expense. 

we
sponsor defined benefit plans in a number of countries outside of the u.s. the availability of these plans, and their specific design provisions, are consistent with local competitive
practices and regulations. 

during
the fourth quarter of 2010, our tioxide u.k. pension plan was closed to new entrants. for existing participants, benefits will only grow as a result of increases in pay. a defined
contribution plan was established to replace the tioxide u.k. pension plan for future benefit accruals. 

we
also sponsor unfunded postretirement benefit plans other than pensions, which provide medical and life insurance benefits. 

our
postretirement benefit plans provide a fully insured medicare part d plan including prescription drug benefits affected by the medicare prescription drug, improvement and
modernization act of 2003 (the "act"). we cannot determine whether the medical benefits provided by our postretirement benefit plans are actuarially equivalent to those provided by the act. we do not
collect a subsidy and our net periodic postretirement benefits cost, and related benefit obligation, do not reflect an amount associated with the subsidy. 


on
march 23, 2010, president obama signed into law the patient protection and affordable care act. on march 30, 2010, president obama signed into law a reconciliation
measure, the health care and education reconciliation act of 2010. the passage of this legislation has resulted in comprehensive reform of health care in the u.s. we do not believe that this will have
a significant impact on our financial position. 

f-58




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

17. employee benefit plans (continued) 


the
following table sets forth the funded status of the plans for us and huntsman international and the amounts recognized in the consolidated balance sheets at december 31, 2011
and 2010 (dollars in millions): 
 




































 
 
defined benefit plans 
 
other postretirement benefit plans 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 


 
 
u.s.
plans 
 
non-u.s.
plans 
 
u.s.
plans 
 
non-u.s.
plans 
 
u.s.
plans 
 
non-u.s.
plans 
 
u.s.
plans 
 
non-u.s.
plans 
 


change in benefit obligation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


benefit obligation at beginning of year
 
$
761
 
$
2,255
 
$
705
 
$
2,152
 
$
129
 
$
7
 
$
127
 
$
8
 


service cost
 
 
23
 
 
44
 
 
21
 
 
44
 
 
3
 
 
—
 
 
3
 
 
—
 


interest cost
 
 
44
 
 
110
 
 
40
 
 
102
 
 
7
 
 
1
 
 
7
 
 
—
 


participant contributions
 
 
—
 
 
14
 
 
—
 
 
13
 
 
5
 
 
—
 
 
4
 
 
—
 


plan amendments
 
 
—
 
 
(1
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


foreign currency exchange rate changes
 
 
—
 
 
(13
)
 
—
 
 
(23
)
 
—
 
 
(1
)
 
—
 
 
—
 


settlements/transfers
 
 
—
 
 
(20
)
 
—
 
 
(10
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


curtailments
 
 
—
 
 
(38
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


special termination benefits
 
 
—
 
 
8
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


actuarial loss
 
 
47
 
 
83
 
 
34
 
 
64
 
 
1
 
 
—
 
 
5
 
 
—
 


benefits paid
 
 
(41
)
 
(111
)
 
(39
)
 
(87
)
 
(17
)
 
(1
)
 
(17
)
 
(1
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


benefit obligation at end of year
 
$
834
 
$
2,331
 
$
761
 
$
2,255
 
$
128
 
$
6
 
$
129
 
$
7
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


change in plan assets
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


fair value of plan assets at beginning of year
 
$
517
 
$
2,025
 
$
461
 
$
1,880
 
$
—
 
$
—
 
$
—
 
$
—
 


actual return on plan assets
 
 
(7
)
 
43
 
 
61
 
 
163
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


foreign currency exchange rate changes
 
 
—
 
 
(10
)
 
—
 
 
(15
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


participant contributions
 
 
—
 
 
14
 
 
—
 
 
13
 
 
5
 
 
—
 
 
4
 
 
—
 


other
 
 
—
 
 
(1
)
 
—
 
 
2
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


company contributions
 
 
69
 
 
86
 
 
34
 
 
79
 
 
12
 
 
1
 
 
13
 
 
1
 


settlements/transfers
 
 
—
 
 
(20
)
 
—
 
 
(10
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


benefits paid
 
 
(41
)
 
(111
)
 
(39
)
 
(87
)
 
(17
)
 
(1
)
 
(17
)
 
(1
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


fair value of plan assets at end of year
 
$
538
 
$
2,026
 
$
517
 
$
2,025
 
$
—
 
$
—
 
$
—
 
$
—
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


funded status
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


fair value of plan assets
 
$
538
 
$
2,026
 
$
517
 
$
2,025
 
$
—
 
$
—
 
$
—
 
$
—
 


benefit obligation
 
 
834
 
 
2,331
 
 
761
 
 
2,255
 
 
128
 
 
6
 
 
129
 
 
7
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


accrued benefit cost
 
$
(296
)
$
(305
)
$
(244
)
$
(230
)
$
(128
)
$
(6
)
$
(129
)
$
(7
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


amounts recognized in balance sheet
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


noncurrent asset
 
$
—
 
$
100
 
$
—
 
$
75
 
$
—
 
$
—
 
$
—
 
$
—
 


current liability
 
 
(6
)
 
(6
)
 
(5
)
 
(6
)
 
(12
)
 
—
 
 
(12
)
 
—
 


noncurrent liability
 
 
(290
)
 
(399
)
 
(239
)
 
(299
)
 
(116
)
 
(6
)
 
(117
)
 
(7
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
$
(296
)
$
(305
)
$
(244
)
$
(230
)
$
(128
)
$
(6
)
$
(129
)
$
(7
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
f-59






 




































 
table of contents 


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries  

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries  

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)  

17. employee benefit plans (continued)  

huntsman corporation  
 




































 
 
defined benefit plans 
 
other postretirement benefit plans 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 


 
 
u.s.
plans 
 
non-u.s.
plans 
 
u.s.
plans 
 
non-u.s.
plans 
 
u.s.
plans 
 
non-u.s.
plans 
 
u.s.
plans 
 
non-u.s.
plans 
 


amounts recognized in accumulated other comprehensive loss (income)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net actuarial loss
 
$
366
 
$
562
 
$
281
 
$
434
 
$
25
 
$
1
 
$
26
 
$
1
 


prior service cost
 
 
(22
)
 
2
 
 
(27
)
 
2
 
 
(10
)
 
—
 
 
(13
)
 
—
 


transition obligation
 
 
1
 
 
—
 
 
1
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
$
345
 
$
564
 
$
255
 
$
436
 
$
15
 
$
1
 
$
13
 
$
1
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
huntsman international  
 




































 
 
defined benefit plans 
 
other postretirement benefit plans 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 


 
 
u.s.
plans 
 
non-u.s.
plans 
 
u.s.
plans 
 
non-u.s.
plans 
 
u.s.
plans 
 
non-u.s.
plans 
 
u.s.
plans 
 
non-u.s.
plans 
 


amounts recognized in accumulated other comprehensive loss (income)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net actuarial loss
 
$
368
 
$
636
 
$
284
 
$
513
 
$
25
 
$
1
 
$
26
 
$
1
 


prior service cost
 
 
(22
)
 
2
 
 
(27
)
 
2
 
 
(10
)
 
—
 
 
(13
)
 
—
 


transition obligation
 
 
1
 
 
—
 
 
1
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
$
347
 
$
638
 
$
258
 
$
515
 
$
15
 
$
1
 
$
13
 
$
1
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
the
amounts in accumulated other comprehensive loss that are expected to be recognized as components of net periodic benefit cost during the next fiscal year are as follows (dollars in
millions): 

huntsman corporation  
 
























 
 
defined benefit plans 
 
other postretirement
benefit plans 
 


 
 
u.s. plans 
 
non-u.s.
plans 
 
u.s. plans 
 
non-u.s.
plans 
 


actuarial loss
 
$
21
 
$
23
 
$
2
 
$
—
 


prior service cost
 
 
(5
)
 
(2
)
 
(3
)
 
—
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
$
16
 
$
21
 
$
(1
)
$
—
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
f-60




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

17. employee benefit plans (continued) 

huntsman international  
 
























 
 
defined benefit plans 
 
other postretirement
benefit plans 
 


 
 
u.s. plans 
 
non-u.s.
plans 
 
u.s. plans 
 
non-u.s.
plans 
 


actuarial loss
 
$
21
 
$
28
 
$
2
 
$
—
 


prior service cost
 
 
(5
)
 
(2
)
 
(3
)
 
—
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
$
16
 
$
26
 
$
(1
)
$
—
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 

components
of net periodic benefit costs for the years ended december 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 were as follows (dollars in millions): 

huntsman corporation  
 






























 
 
defined benefit plans 
 


 
 
u.s. plans 
 
non-u.s. plans 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


service cost
 
$
23
 
$
21
 
$
20
 
$
44
 
$
44
 
$
43
 


interest cost
 
 
44
 
 
40
 
 
41
 
 
110
 
 
102
 
 
102
 


expected return on plan assets
 
 
(47
)
 
(42
)
 
(41
)
 
(140
)
 
(121
)
 
(104
)


amortization of transition obligation
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
1
 


amortization of prior service cost
 
 
(4
)
 
(5
)
 
(5
)
 
(2
)
 
(1
)
 
(1
)


amortization of actuarial loss
 
 
16
 
 
11
 
 
7
 
 
16
 
 
14
 
 
27
 


settlement loss (gain)
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
2
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


special termination benefits
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
8
 
 
—
 
 
2
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net periodic benefit cost
 
$
32
 
$
25
 
$
24
 
$
36
 
$
38
 
$
70
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
  
 






























 
 
other postretirement benefit plans 
 


 
 
u.s. plans 
 
non-u.s. plans 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


service cost
 
$
3
 
$
3
 
$
3
 
$
—
 
$
—
 
$
3
 


interest cost
 
 
7
 
 
7
 
 
8
 
 
1
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


amortization of prior service cost
 
 
(3
)
 
(3
)
 
(4
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


amortization of actuarial loss
 
 
2
 
 
1
 
 
1
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net periodic benefit cost
 
$
9
 
$
8
 
$
8
 
$
1
 
$
—
 
$
3
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
f-61




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

17. employee benefit plans (continued) 

huntsman international  
 






























 
 
defined benefit plans 
 


 
 
u.s. plans 
 
non-u.s. plans 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


service cost
 
$
23
 
$
21
 
$
20
 
$
44
 
$
44
 
$
43
 


interest cost
 
 
44
 
 
40
 
 
41
 
 
110
 
 
102
 
 
102
 


expected return on plan assets
 
 
(47
)
 
(42
)
 
(41
)
 
(140
)
 
(121
)
 
(104
)


amortization of transition obligation
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
1
 


amortization of prior service cost
 
 
(4
)
 
(5
)
 
(5
)
 
(2
)
 
(1
)
 
(1
)


amortization of actuarial loss
 
 
16
 
 
11
 
 
7
 
 
21
 
 
19
 
 
33
 


settlement loss
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
2
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


special termination benefits
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
8
 
 
—
 
 
2
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net periodic benefit cost
 
$
32
 
$
25
 
$
24
 
$
41
 
$
43
 
$
76
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
  
 






























 
 
other postretirement benefit plans 
 


 
 
u.s. plans 
 
non-u.s. plans 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


service cost
 
$
3
 
$
3
 
$
3
 
$
—
 
$
—
 
$
3
 


interest cost
 
 
7
 
 
7
 
 
8
 
 
1
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


amortization of prior service cost
 
 
(3
)
 
(3
)
 
(4
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


amortization of actuarial loss
 
 
2
 
 
1
 
 
1
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net periodic benefit cost
 
$
9
 
$
8
 
$
8
 
$
1
 
$
—
 
$
3
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
f-62




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

17. employee benefit plans (continued) 


the
amounts recognized in net periodic benefit cost and other comprehensive loss (income) as of december 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 were as follows (dollars in millions): 

huntsman corporation  
 






























 
 
defined benefit plans 
 


 
 
u.s. plans 
 
non-u.s. plans 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


current year actuarial loss (gain)
 
$
101
 
$
16
 
$
(7
)
$
182
 
$
20
 
$
(124
)


amortization of actuarial gain
 
 
(16
)
 
(11
)
 
(7
)
 
(16
)
 
(14
)
 
(27
)


current year prior service (credit) cost
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(2
)
 
—
 
 
1
 


amortization of prior service cost
 
 
4
 
 
4
 
 
5
 
 
2
 
 
1
 
 
1
 


amortization of transition asset
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(1
)


curtailment effects
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(38
)
 
—
 
 
(12
)


settlements
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(2
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total recognized in other comprehensive loss (income)
 
 
89
 
 
9
 
 
(11
)
 
128
 
 
7
 
 
(162
)


net periodic benefit cost
 
 
32
 
 
25
 
 
24
 
 
36
 
 
38
 
 
70
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total recognized in net periodic benefit cost and other comprehensive loss (income)
 
$
121
 
$
34
 
$
13
 
$
164
 
$
45
 
$
(92
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
  
 






























 
 
other postretirement benefit plans 
 


 
 
u.s. plans 
 
non-u.s. plans 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


current year actuarial loss (gain)
 
$
1
 
$
5
 
$
(14
)
$
—
 
$
—
 
$
—
 


amortization of actuarial gain
 
 
(1
)
 
(2
)
 
(1
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


current year prior service credit
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(5
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


amortization of prior service cost
 
 
2
 
 
3
 
 
4
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total recognized in other comprehensive loss (income)
 
 
2
 
 
6
 
 
(16
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


net periodic benefit cost
 
 
9
 
 
8
 
 
8
 
 
1
 
 
—
 
 
3
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total recognized in net periodic benefit cost and other comprehensive loss (income)
 
$
11
 
$
14
 
$
(8
)
$
1
 
$
—
 
$
3
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
f-63






 




































 
table of contents 


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries  

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries  

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)  

17. employee benefit plans (continued)  

huntsman international  
 






























 
 
defined benefit plans 
 


 
 
u.s. plans 
 
non-u.s. plans 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


current year actuarial loss (gain)
 
$
101
 
$
16
 
$
(7
)
$
182
 
$
20
 
$
(124
)


amortization of actuarial gain
 
 
(16
)
 
(11
)
 
(7
)
 
(21
)
 
(19
)
 
(33
)


current year prior service (credit) cost
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(2
)
 
—
 
 
1
 


amortization of prior service cost
 
 
4
 
 
4
 
 
5
 
 
2
 
 
1
 
 
1
 


amortization of transition asset
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(1
)


curtailment effects
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(38
)
 
—
 
 
(12
)


settlements
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(2
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total recognized in other comprehensive loss (income)
 
 
89
 
 
9
 
 
(11
)
 
123
 
 
2
 
 
(168
)


net periodic benefit cost
 
 
32
 
 
25
 
 
24
 
 
41
 
 
43
 
 
76
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total recognized in net periodic benefit cost and other comprehensive loss (income)
 
$
121
 
$
34
 
$
13
 
$
164
 
$
45
 
$
(92
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
  
 






























 
 
other postretirement benefit plans 
 


 
 
u.s. plans 
 
non-u.s. plans 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


current year actuarial loss (gain)
 
$
1
 
$
5
 
$
(14
)
$
—
 
$
—
 
$
—
 


amortization of actuarial gain
 
 
(1
)
 
(2
)
 
(1
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


current year prior service credit
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(5
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


amortization of prior service cost
 
 
2
 
 
3
 
 
4
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total recognized in other comprehensive loss (income)
 
 
2
 
 
6
 
 
(16
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


net periodic benefit cost
 
 
9
 
 
8
 
 
8
 
 
1
 
 
—
 
 
3
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total recognized in net periodic benefit cost and other comprehensive loss (income)
 
$
11
 
$
14
 
$
(8
)
$
1
 
$
—
 
$
3
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
f-64




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 


17. employee benefit plans (continued) 

the
following weighted-average assumptions were used to determine the projected benefit obligation at the measurement date and the net periodic pension cost for the year: 
 






























 
 
defined benefit plans 
 


 
 
u.s. plans 
 
non u.s. plans 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


projected benefit obligation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


discount rate
 
 
5.30
%
 
5.70
%
 
5.90
%
 
4.39
%
 
4.69
%
 
4.94
%


rate of compensation increase
 
 
3.88
%
 
3.88
%
 
3.88
%
 
3.44
%
 
3.38
%
 
3.23
%


net periodic pension cost
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


discount rate
 
 
5.70
%
 
5.90
%
 
6.47
%
 
4.69
%
 
4.94
%
 
5.04
%


rate of compensation increase
 
 
3.88
%
 
3.88
%
 
3.77
%
 
3.38
%
 
3.23
%
 
3.21
%


expected return on plan assets
 
 
8.19
%
 
8.20
%
 
8.25
%
 
6.62
%
 
6.65
%
 
6.62
%



 
  
 






























 
 
other postretirement benefit plans 
 


 
 
u.s. plans 
 
non u.s. plans 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


projected benefit obligation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


discount rate
 
 
5.09
%
 
5.46
%
 
5.59
%
 
6.09
%
 
6.69
%
 
7.47
%


net periodic pension cost
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


discount rate
 
 
5.46
%
 
5.59
%
 
6.39
%
 
6.69
%
 
7.47
%
 
7.60
%



 
in
both 2011 and 2010, the health care trend rate used to measure the expected increase in the cost of benefits was assumed to be 7.5% decreasing to 5% after 2016. assumed health care
cost trend rates can have a significant effect on the amounts reported for the postretirement benefit plans. a one-percent point change in assumed health care cost trend rates would have
the following effects (dollars in millions): 
 


















 
 
increase 
 
decrease 
 


asset category
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


effect on total of service and interest cost
 
$
—
 
$
—
 


effect on postretirement benefit obligation
 
 
4
 
 
(4
)



 
the
projected benefit obligation and fair value of plan assets for the defined benefit plans with projected benefit obligations in excess of plan assets as of december 31, 2011
and 2010 were as follows (dollars in millions): 
 
























 
 
u.s. plans 
 
non-u.s. plans 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 


projected benefit obligation in excess of plan assets
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


projected benefit obligation
 
$
834
 
$
761
 
$
1,897
 
$
1,797
 


fair value of plan assets
 
 
538
 
 
517
 
 
1,492
 
 
1,493
 



 
f-65




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

17. employee benefit plans (continued) 

the
projected benefit obligation, accumulated benefit obligation and fair value of plan assets for the defined benefit plans with an accumulated benefit obligation in excess of plan
assets as of december 31, 2011 and 2010 were as follows (dollars in millions): 
 
























 
 
u.s. plans 
 
non-u.s. plans 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 


accumulated benefit obligation in excess of plan assets
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


projected benefit obligation
 
$
834
 
$
761
 
$
1,618
 
$
745
 


accumulated benefit obligation
 
 
789
 
 
712
 
 
1,500
 
 
684
 


fair value of plan assets
 
 
538
 
 
517
 
 
1,251
 
 
514
 



 
expected
future contributions and benefit payments are as follows (dollars in millions): 
 
























 
 
u.s. plans 
 
non-u.s. plans 
 


 
 
defined
benefit
plans 
 
other
postretirement
benefit
plans 
 
defined
benefit
plans 
 
other
postretirement
benefit
plans 
 


2012 expected employer contributions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


to plan trusts
 
$
72
 
$
11
 
$
70
 
$
1
 


expected benefit payments
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


2012
 
 
58
 
 
11
 
 
97
 
 
1
 


2013
 
 
59
 
 
11
 
 
91
 
 
1
 


2014
 
 
50
 
 
11
 
 
93
 
 
1
 


2015
 
 
50
 
 
11
 
 
99
 
 
1
 


2016
 
 
53
 
 
11
 
 
101
 
 
1
 


2017 - 2021
 
 
302
 
 
50
 
 
546
 
 
2
 



 
our
investment strategy with respect to pension assets is to pursue an investment plan that, over the long term, is expected to protect the funded status of the plan, enhance the real
purchasing power of plan assets, and not threaten the plan's ability to meet currently committed obligations. additionally, our investment strategy is to achieve returns on plan assets, subject to a
prudent level of portfolio risk. plan assets are invested in a broad range of investments. these investments are diversified in terms of domestic and international equities, both growth and value
funds, including small, mid and large capitalization equities; short-term and long-term debt securities; real estate; and cash and cash equivalents. the investments are further
diversified within each asset category. the portfolio diversification provides protection against a single investment or asset category having a disproportionate impact on the aggregate performance of
the plan assets. 

our
pension plan assets are managed by outside investment managers. the investment managers value our plan assets using quoted market prices, other observable inputs or unobservable
inputs. for certain assets, the investment managers obtain third party appraisals at least annually, which use valuation techniques and inputs specific to the applicable property, market, or
geographic location. 

f-66




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

17. employee benefit plans (continued) 

we
have established target allocations for each asset category. our pension plan assets are periodically rebalanced based upon our target allocations. 

the
fair value of plan assets for the pension plans was $2.6 billion and $2.5 billion at december 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. the following plan assets are
measured at fair value on a recurring basis (dollars in millions): 
 
























 
 
 
 
fair value amounts using 
 


asset category



 
 
december 31,
2011 
 
quoted prices in
active markets
for identical
assets (level 1) 
 
significant other
observable
inputs
(level 2) 
 
significant
unobservable
inputs
(level 3) 
 


u.s. pension plans:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


equities
 
$
294
 
$
166
 
$
128
 
$
—
 


fixed income
 
 
170
 
 
106
 
 
64
 
 
—
 


real estate/other
 
 
72
 
 
45
 
 
—
 
 
27
 


cash
 
 
2
 
 
2
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total u.s. pension plan assets
 
$
538
 
$
319
 
$
192
 
$
27
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


non-u.s. pension plans:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


equities
 
$
771
 
$
361
 
$
410
 
$
—
 


fixed income
 
 
923
 
 
304
 
 
619
 
 
—
 


real estate/other
 
 
316
 
 
1
 
 
281
 
 
34
 


cash
 
 
16
 
 
16
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total non-u.s. pension plan assets
 
$
2,026
 
$
682
 
$
1,310
 
$
34
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
  
 
























 
 
 
 
fair value amounts using 
 


asset category



 
 
december 31,
2010 
 
quoted prices in
active markets
for identical
assets (level 1) 
 
significant other
observable
inputs
(level 2) 
 
significant
unobservable
inputs
(level 3) 
 


u.s. pension plans:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


equities
 
$
295
 
$
174
 
$
121
 
$
—
 


fixed income
 
 
155
 
 
97
 
 
57
 
 
1
 


real estate/other
 
 
64
 
 
45
 
 
—
 
 
19
 


cash
 
 
3
 
 
3
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total u.s. pension plan assets
 
$
517
 
$
319
 
$
178
 
$
20
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


non-u.s. pension plans:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


equities
 
$
868
 
$
440
 
$
428
 
$
—
 


fixed income
 
 
891
 
 
244
 
 
647
 
 
—
 


real estate/other
 
 
248
 
 
2
 
 
213
 
 
33
 


cash
 
 
18
 
 
18
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total non-u.s. pension plan assets
 
$
2,025
 
$
704
 
$
1,288
 
$
33
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
f-67




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

17. employee benefit plans (continued) 


the
following table reconciles the beginning and ending balances of plan assets measured at fair value using unobservable inputs (level 3) (dollars in millions): 
 


















 
 
real estate/other 
 


fair value measurements of plan assets using significant unobservable inputs (level 3)



 
 
year ended
december 31,
2011 
 
year ended
december 31,
2010 
 


balance at beginning of period
 
$
52
 
$
33
 


return on pension plan assets
 
 
(1
)
 
3
 


purchases, sales and settlements
 
 
10
 
 
16
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


balance at end of period
 
$
61
 
$
52
 


 
 
 
 
 
 



 
  
 


















 
 
fixed income 
 


fair value measurements of plan assets using significant unobservable inputs (level 3)



 
 
year ended
december 31,
2011 
 
year ended
december 31,
2010 
 


balance at beginning of period
 
$
1
 
$
—
 


return on pension plan assets
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


purchases, sales and settlements
 
 
(1
)
 
1
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


balance at end of period
 
$
—
 
$
1
 


 
 
 
 
 
 



 
based
upon historical returns, the expectations of our investment committee and outside advisors, the expected long term rate of return on the pension assets is estimated to be between
6.62% and 8.25%. the asset allocation for our pension plans at december 31, 2011 and 2010 and the target allocation for 2012, by asset category are as follows: 
 





















asset category



 
 
target
allocation
2012 
 
allocation at
december 31,
2011 
 
allocation at
december 31,
2010 
 


u.s. pension plans:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


equities
 
 
54
%
 
55
%
 
57
%


fixed income
 
 
33
%
 
32
%
 
30
%


real estate/other
 
 
13
%
 
13
%
 
12
%


cash
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
1
%


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total u.s. pension plans
 
 
100
%
 
100
%
 
100
%


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


non-u.s. pension plans:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


equities
 
 
39
%
 
38
%
 
43
%


fixed income
 
 
45
%
 
46
%
 
44
%


real estate/other
 
 
15
%
 
15
%
 
12
%


cash
 
 
1
%
 
1
%
 
1
%


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total non-u.s. pension plans
 
 
100
%
 
100
%
 
100
%


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
f-68




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

17. employee benefit plans (continued) 

equity
securities in our pension plans did not include any equity securities of our company or our affiliates at the end of 2011. 


defined contribution plans  

we have a money purchase pension plan covering substantially all of our domestic employees who were hired prior to january 1,
2004. employer contributions are made based on a percentage of employees' earnings (ranging up to 8%). 

we
also have a salary deferral plan covering substantially all u.s. employees. plan participants may elect to make voluntary contributions to this plan up to a specified amount of their
compensation. we contribute an amount equal to one-half of the participant's contribution, not to exceed 2% of the participant's compensation. 


along
with the introduction of the cash balance formula within our defined benefit pension plan, the money purchase pension plan was closed to new hires. at the same time, the company
match in the salary deferral plan was increased, for new hires, to a 100% match, not to exceed 4% of the participant's compensation, once the participant has achieved six years of service with the
company. 

our
total combined expense for the above defined contribution plans for the years ended december 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 was $14 million, $14 million and
$12 million, respectively. 


supplemental salary deferral plan and supplemental executive retirement plan  

the huntsman supplemental savings plan ("huntsman ssp") is a non-qualified plan covering key management employees and
allows participants to defer amounts that would otherwise be paid as compensation. the participant can defer up to 75% of their salary and bonus each year. this plan also provides benefits that would
be provided under the huntsman salary deferral plan if that plan were not subject to legal limits on the amount of contributions that can be allocated to an individual in a single year. the huntsman
ssp was amended and restated effective as of january 1, 2005 to allow eligible executive employees to comply with section 409a of the internal revenue code of 1986. 


the
huntsman supplemental executive retirement plan (the "serp") is an unfunded non-qualified pension plan established to provide certain executive employees with benefits
that could not be provided, due to legal limitations, under the huntsman defined benefit pension plan, a qualified defined benefit pension plan, and the huntsman money purchase pension plan, a
qualified money purchase pension plan. 

assets
of these plans are included in other noncurrent assets and as of december 31, 2011 and 2010 were $12 million and $11 million, respectively. during each of the
years ended december 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009, we expensed a total of $1 million, $1 million and nil, respectively, as contributions to the huntsman ssp and the serp. 

stock-based incentive plan  

in connection with the initial public offering of common and preferred stock on february 16, 2005, we adopted the huntsman stock
incentive plan (the "stock incentive plan"). the stock incentive plan permits the grant of non-qualified stock options, incentive stock options, stock appreciation rights, 

f-69




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 


17. employee benefit plans (continued) 

nonvested
stock, phantom stock, performance awards and other stock-based awards to our employees, directors and consultants and to employees and consultants of our subsidiaries, provided that
incentive stock options may be granted solely to employees. as of december 31, 2011 we are authorized to grant up to of 32.6 million shares under the stock incentive plan. see
"note 22. stock-based compensation plan." 

international plans  


international employees are covered by various post employment arrangements consistent with local practices and regulations. such
obligations are included in the consolidated financial statements in other long-term liabilities. 


18. income taxes  


the following is a summary of u.s. and non-u.s. provisions for current and deferred income taxes (dollars in millions): 

huntsman corporation  
 





















 
 
year ended
december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


income tax expense (benefit):
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


u.s.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


current
 
$
69
 
$
(35
)
$
188
 


deferred
 
 
4
 
 
47
 
 
160
 


non-u.s.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


current
 
 
63
 
 
41
 
 
18
 


deferred
 
 
(27
)
 
(24
)
 
78
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
$
109
 
$
29
 
$
444
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
huntsman international  
 





















 
 
year ended
december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


income tax expense (benefit):
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


u.s.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


current
 
$
7
 
$
(23
)
$
67
 


deferred
 
 
69
 
 
45
 
 
(13
)


non-u.s.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


current
 
 
63
 
 
41
 
 
17
 


deferred
 
 
(26
)
 
(23
)
 
88
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
$
113
 
$
40
 
$
159
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
f-70






 




































 
table of contents 


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries  

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries  

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)  

18. income taxes (continued)  



the following schedule reconciles the differences between the u.s. federal income taxes at the u.s. statutory rate to our provision (benefit) for income taxes (dollars in millions): 

huntsman corporation  
 





















 
 
year ended
december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


income from continuing operations before income taxes
 
$
360
 
$
20
 
$
569
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


expected tax expense at u.s. statutory rate of 35%
 
$
126
 
$
7
 
$
199
 


change resulting from:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


state tax expense (benefit) net of federal benefit
 
 
7
 
 
(4
)
 
7
 


non-u.s. tax rate differentials
 
 
6
 
 
(16
)
 
46
 


effects of non-u.s. operations
 
 
7
 
 
28
 
 
(4
)


portion of convertible note loss on early extinguishment of debt treated as equity for tax purposes
 
 
—
 
 
43
 
 
—
 


tax authority dispute resolutions
 
 
(4
)
 
(21
)
 
(6
)


tax benefit of losses with valuation allowances as a result of other comprehensive income
 
 
(1
)
 
(4
)
 
(38
)


change in valuation allowance
 
 
(16
)
 
(19
)
 
223
 


other, net
 
 
(16
)
 
15
 
 
17
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total income tax expense
 
$
109
 
$
29
 
$
444
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
huntsman international  
 





















 
 
year ended
december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


income (loss) from continuing operations before income taxes
 
$
370
 
$
184
 
$
(240
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


expected tax expense (benefit) at u.s. statutory rate of 35%
 
$
130
 
$
64
 
$
(84
)


change resulting from:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


state tax expense (benefit) net of federal benefit
 
 
7
 
 
(4
)
 
(1
)


non-u.s. tax rate differentials
 
 
6
 
 
(16
)
 
46
 


effects of non-u.s. operations
 
 
8
 
 
29
 
 
(4
)


tax authority dispute resolutions
 
 
(4
)
 
(21
)
 
(6
)


tax benefit of losses with valuation allowances as a result of other comprehensive income
 
 
(1
)
 
(4
)
 
(39
)


change in valuation allowance
 
 
(19
)
 
(22
)
 
230
 


other, net
 
 
(14
)
 
14
 
 
17
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total income tax expense
 
$
113
 
$
40
 
$
159
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
f-71




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

18. income taxes (continued) 

on
september 8, 2009, we announced the closure of our australia styrenics operations. u.s. tax law, under our relevant facts, provides for a deduction on investments that are
"worthless" for u.s. tax purposes. therefore, during 2011, 2010, and 2009, we recorded tax benefits of $2 million, $28 million and $74 million, respectively, in discontinued
operations related to the closure of and the cumulative u.s. investments in our australia styrenics business. 

included
in the 2011, 2010 and 2009 non-u.s. deferred tax expense is $1 million, $4 million and $38 million, respectively, of income tax benefit for
losses from continuing operations for certain jurisdictions with valuation allowances to the extent income was recorded in other comprehensive income. an offsetting income tax expense was recognized
in accumulated other comprehensive income. 

the
components of income (loss) from continuing operations before income taxes were as follows (dollars in millions): 

huntsman corporation  
 





















 
 
year ended
december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


u.s. 
 
$
256
 
$
(126
)
$
901
 


non-u.s. 
 
 
104
 
 
146
 
 
(332
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
$
360
 
$
20
 
$
569
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
huntsman international  
 





















 
 
year ended
december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


u.s. 
 
$
255
 
$
38
 
$
92
 


non-u.s. 
 
 
115
 
 
146
 
 
(332
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
$
370
 
$
184
 
$
(240
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
f-72




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 


18. income taxes (continued) 

components
of deferred income tax assets and liabilities were as follows (dollars in millions): 

huntsman corporation  
 


















 
 
december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 


deferred income tax assets:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net operating loss carryforwards
 
$
824
 
$
780
 


pension and other employee compensation
 
 
256
 
 
218
 


property, plant and equipment
 
 
77
 
 
97
 


intangible assets
 
 
36
 
 
51
 


foreign tax credits
 
 
46
 
 
58
 


other, net
 
 
98
 
 
119
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
$
1,337
 
$
1,323
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


deferred income tax liabilities:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


property, plant and equipment
 
$
(549
)
$
(562
)


pension and other employee compensation
 
 
(25
)
 
(19
)


other, net
 
 
(108
)
 
(111
)


 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
$
(682
)
$
(692
)


 
 
 
 
 
 


net deferred tax asset before valuation allowance
 
$
655
 
$
631
 


valuation allowance
 
 
(756
)
 
(797
)


 
 
 
 
 
 


net deferred tax liability
 
$
(101
)
$
(166
)


 
 
 
 
 
 


current deferred tax asset
 
$
20
 
$
1
 


current deferred tax liability
 
 
(7
)
 
(19
)


non-current deferred tax asset
 
 
195
 
 
166
 


non-current deferred tax liability
 
 
(309
)
 
(314
)


 
 
 
 
 
 


net deferred tax liability
 
$
(101
)
$
(166
)


 
 
 
 
 
 



 
f-73




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

18. income taxes (continued) 

huntsman international  
 


















 
 
december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 


deferred income tax assets:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net operating loss and amt credit carryforwards
 
$
895
 
$
970
 


pension and other employee compensation
 
 
254
 
 
216
 


property, plant and equipment
 
 
77
 
 
97
 


intangible assets
 
 
35
 
 
50
 


foreign tax credits
 
 
82
 
 
75
 


other, net
 
 
140
 
 
116
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
$
1,483
 
$
1,524
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


deferred income tax liabilities:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


property, plant and equipment
 
$
(515
)
$
(520
)


pension and other employee compensation
 
 
(25
)
 
(19
)


other, net
 
 
(107
)
 
(110
)


 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
$
(647
)
$
(649
)


 
 
 
 
 
 


net deferred tax asset before valuation allowance
 
$
836
 
$
875
 


valuation allowance
 
 
(768
)
 
(813
)


 
 
 
 
 
 


net deferred tax asset
 
$
68
 
$
62
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


current deferred tax asset
 
$
40
 
$
40
 


current deferred tax liability
 
 
(29
)
 
(63
)


non-current deferred tax asset
 
 
163
 
 
179
 


non-current deferred tax liability
 
 
(106
)
 
(94
)


 
 
 
 
 
 


net deferred tax asset
 
$
68
 
$
62
 


 
 
 
 
 
 



 
we
have net operating loss carryforwards ("nols") of $2,743 million in various non-u.s. jurisdictions. while the majority of the non-u.s. nols have no
expiration date, $1,172 million have a limited life (of which $1,064 million are subject to a valuation allowance) and none are scheduled to expire in 2012. we had $68 million of
nols expire unused in 2011, substantially all of which were in switzerland and had been subject to a full valuation allowance. 


included
in the $2,743 million of non-u.s. nols is $977 million attributable to our luxembourg entities. as of december 31, 2011, there is a valuation
allowance of $268 million against these net tax-effected nols of $281 million. due to the uncertainty surrounding the realization of the benefits of these losses, we have
reduced substantially all of the related deferred tax asset with a valuation allowance. 

valuation
allowances are reviewed each period on a tax jurisdiction by jurisdiction basis to analyze whether there is sufficient positive or negative evidence to support a change in
judgment about the realizability of the related deferred tax assets. these conclusions require significant judgment. in evaluating the objective evidence that historical results provide, we consider
the cyclicality of businesses 

f-74




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

18. income taxes (continued) 

and
cumulative income or losses during the applicable period. cumulative losses incurred over the period limits our ability to consider other subjective evidence such as our projections for the
future. 

during
2011, we released valuation allowances of $27 million on a portion of our net deferred tax assets in france, spain, singapore, australia and luxembourg, and we established
valuation allowances of $5 million on certain net deferred tax assets in china and thailand. 

recent
profitability in our pigments business has led to sufficient positive evidence to release a portion of the valuation allowances in france and spain, in amounts of
$10 million and $2 million, respectively. continued and sustained profitability in the pigments business could result in additional valuation allowances being released in the future. the
valuation allowance in singapore of $2 million was released primarily as a result of a cumulative history of operating profits. additional partial valuation allowance releases were recognized
in australia of $5 million and luxembourg of $8 million, and these will continue to be periodically adjusted with any significant changes in estimated future taxable income, all within
the current plans for the future tax structure of these jurisdictions. 

cumulative
losses and the restructuring of our textile effects business resulted in the determination that it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets of the textile effects
businesses in china of
$4 million and thailand of $1 million would not be realized. continued sustained losses in the textile effects business could result in the future establishment of additional valuation
allowances in other jurisdictions. 

during
2010, we released valuation allowances of $20 million on certain net deferred tax assets, principally in australia (as a result of discontinuing the unprofitable portion of
the business operations in that country) and luxembourg (as a result of restructuring our internal treasury activities such that a portion of the deferred tax assets is more likely than not to be
realized). during 2009, we established valuation allowances of $149 million on certain net deferred tax assets, principally in the u.k., primarily as a result of a cumulative history of
operating losses. 

uncertainties
regarding expected future income in certain jurisdictions could affect the realization of deferred tax assets in those jurisdictions and result in additional valuation
allowances in future periods. 

f-75




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 


18. income taxes (continued) 

the
following is a summary of changes in the valuation allowance (dollars in millions): 

huntsman corporation  
 





















 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


valuation allowance as of january 1
 
$
797
 
$
842
 
$
669
 


valuation allowance as of december 31
 
 
756
 
 
797
 
 
842
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net decrease (increase)
 
 
41
 
 
45
 
 
(173
)


foreign currency movements
 
 
(30
)
 
1
 
 
14
 


increase (decrease) to deferred tax assets with an offsetting (decrease) increase to valuation allowances
 
 
5
 
 
(27
)
 
(64
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


change in valuation allowance per rate reconciliation
 
$
16
 
$
19
 
$
(223
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


components of change in valuation allowance affecting tax expense:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


pre-tax losses in jurisdictions with valuation allowances resulting in no tax expense or benefit
 
$
(6
)
$
(1
)
$
(78
)


releases of valuation allowances in various jurisdictions
 
 
27
 
 
20
 
 
4
 


establishments of valuation allowances in various jurisdictions
 
 
(5
)
 
—
 
 
(149
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


change in valuation allowance per rate reconciliation
 
$
16
 
$
19
 
$
(223
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
huntsman international  
 





















 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


valuation allowance as of january 1
 
$
813
 
$
861
 
$
681
 


valuation allowance as of december 31
 
 
768
 
 
813
 
 
861
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net decrease (increase)
 
 
45
 
 
48
 
 
(180
)


foreign currency movements
 
 
(30
)
 
1
 
 
14
 


increase (decrease) to deferred tax assets with an offsetting (decrease) increase to valuation allowances
 
 
4
 
 
(27
)
 
(64
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


change in valuation allowance per rate reconciliation
 
$
19
 
$
22
 
$
(230
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


components of change in valuation allowance affecting tax expense:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


pre-tax (losses) income in jurisdictions with valuation allowances resulting in no tax expense or benefit
 
$
(3
)
$
2
 
$
(75
)


releases of valuation allowances in various jurisdictions
 
 
27
 
 
20
 
 
4
 


establishments of valuation allowances in various jurisdictions
 
 
(5
)
 
—
 
 
(159
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


change in valuation allowance per rate reconciliation
 
$
19
 
$
22
 
$
(230
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
f-76




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 


18. income taxes (continued) 

the
following is a reconciliation of our unrecognized tax benefits (dollars in millions): 
 


















 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 


unrecognized tax benefits as of january 1
 
$
43
 
$
74
 


gross increases and decreases—tax positions taken during a prior period
 
 
(3
)
 
(27
)


gross increases and decreases—tax positions taken during the current period
 
 
3
 
 
4
 


reductions resulting from the lapse of statutes of limitation
 
 
(4
)
 
(10
)


foreign currency movements
 
 
—
 
 
2
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


unrecognized tax benefits as of december 31
 
$
39
 
$
43
 


 
 
 
 
 
 



 
as
of december 31, 2011 and 2010, the amount of unrecognized tax benefits which, if recognized, would affect the effective tax rate is $31 million and $32 million,
respectively. 

in
accordance with our accounting policy, we continue to recognize interest and penalties accrued related to unrecognized tax benefits in income tax expense. 
 





















 
 
year ended
december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


interest expense included in tax expense
 
$
5
 
$
1
 
$
3
 


penalties expense included in tax expense
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
1
 



 
  
 


















 
 
december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 


accrued liability for interest
 
$
13
 
$
8
 


accrued liability for penalties
 
 
2
 
 
2
 



 
we
conduct business globally and, as a result, we file income tax returns in the u.s. federal, various u.s. state and various non-u.s. jurisdictions. the following table
summarizes the tax years that remain subject to examination by major tax jurisdictions: 
 













tax jurisdiction



 
 
open tax years 


china
 
2002 and later


hong kong
 
2000 and later


india
 
2004 and later


italy
 
2007 and later


malaysia
 
2003 and later


switzerland
 
2006 and later


the netherlands
 
2006 and later


united kingdom
 
2008 and later


united states federal
 
2011 and later



 
f-77




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

18. income taxes (continued) 

certain
of our u.s. and non-u.s. income tax returns are currently under various stages of audit by applicable tax authorities and the amounts ultimately agreed upon in
resolution of the issues raised may differ materially from the amounts accrued. 


we
estimate that it is reasonably possible that certain of our unrecognized tax benefits, which are individually insignificant, (both u.s. and non-u.s.) could change within
12 months of the reporting date with a resulting decrease in the unrecognized tax benefits within a reasonably possible range of $2 million to $19 million. for the
12-month period from the reporting date, we would expect that a substantial portion of the decrease in our unrecognized tax benefits would result in a corresponding benefit to our income
tax expense. 

during
2011, we concluded and effectively settled tax examinations in the u.s. (both federal and various states) and various non-u.s. jurisdictions including, but not limited
to, australia, china, france and germany. during 2010, we concluded and settled tax examinations in the u.s. (both federal and various states) and various non-u.s. jurisdictions including,
but not limited to, belgium, spain, indonesia, thailand and the u.k. during 2009, we concluded and settled tax examinations in the u.s. (both federal and various states) and various
non-u.s. jurisdictions including, but not limited to, belgium and italy. 

for
non-u.s. entities that were not treated as branches for u.s. tax purposes, the company does not provide for income taxes on the undistributed earnings of these
subsidiaries as earnings are reinvested and, in the opinion of management, will continue to be reinvested indefinitely. the undistributed earnings of foreign subsidiaries that are deemed to be
permanently invested were approximately $226 million at december 31, 2011. it is not practicable to determine the unrecognized deferred tax liability on those earnings. we have material
inter-company debt obligations owed by our non-u.s. subsidiaries to the u.s. the company does not intend to repatriate earnings to the u.s. via dividend based on estimates of future
domestic cash generation and our ability to return cash to the u.s. through payments of inter-company debt owned by our non-u.s. subsidiaries to the u.s. to the extent that cash is
required in the u.s., rather than repatriate earnings to the u.s. via dividend we will utilize our inter-company debt. if any earnings were repatriated via dividend, the company would need to accrue
and pay taxes on the distributions. 

f-78






 




































 
table of contents 


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries  

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries  

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)  

19. commitments and contingencies  


purchase commitments  

we have various purchase commitments extending through 2023 for materials, supplies and services entered into in the ordinary course of
business. included in the purchase commitments table below are contracts which require minimum volume purchases that extend beyond one year or are renewable annually and have been renewed for 2012.
certain contracts allow for changes in minimum required purchase volumes in the event of a temporary or permanent shutdown of a facility. to the extent the contract requires a minimum notice period,
such notice period has been included in the table below. the contractual purchase prices for substantially all of these contracts are variable based upon market prices, subject to annual negotiations.
we have estimated our contractual obligations by using the terms of our 2011 pricing for each contract. we also have a limited number of contracts which require a minimum payment even if no volume is
purchased. we believe that all of our purchase obligations will be utilized in our normal operations. during 2011, 2010 and 2009, we made minimum payments under such take or pay contracts without
taking the product of nil, nil and $6 million, respectively. 


total
purchase commitments as of december 31, 2011 are as follows (dollars in millions): 
 















year ending december 31



 
 
 
 


2012
 
$
685
 


2013
 
 
197
 


2014
 
 
128
 


2015
 
 
104
 


2016
 
 
59
 


thereafter
 
 
94
 


 
 
 
 


 
 
$
1,267
 


 
 
 
 



 
operating leases  

we lease certain railcars, aircraft, equipment and facilities under long-term lease agreements. the total expense recorded
under operating lease agreements in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations is approximately $83 million, $62 million and $56 million for 2011, 2010 and 2009,
respectively, net of sublease rentals of approximately $4 million for each of 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. 

f-79




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

19. commitments and contingencies (continued) 

future
minimum lease payments under operating leases as of december 31, 2011 are as follows (dollars in millions): 
 















year ending december 31



 
 
 
 


2012
 
$
77
 


2013
 
 
71
 


2014
 
 
64
 


2015
 
 
50
 


2016
 
 
45
 


thereafter
 
 
148
 


 
 
 
 


 
 
$
455
 


 
 
 
 



 
future
minimum lease payments have not been reduced by minimum sublease rentals of $28 million due in the future under noncancelable subleases. 


legal matters  

asbestos litigation  

we have been named as a premises defendant in a number of asbestos exposure cases, typically claims by nonemployees of exposure to
asbestos while at a facility. in the past, these cases typically have involved multiple plaintiffs bringing actions against multiple defendants, and the complaints have not indicated which plaintiffs
were making claims against which defendants, where or how the alleged injuries occurred or what injuries each plaintiff claimed. these facts, which would be central to any estimate of probable loss,
generally have been learned only through discovery. 

where
a claimant's alleged exposure occurred prior to our ownership of the relevant premises, the prior owners generally have contractually agreed to retain liability for, and to
indemnify us against, asbestos exposure claims. this indemnification is not subject to any time or dollar amount limitations. upon service of a complaint in one of these cases, we tender it to the
prior owner. rarely do the complaints in these cases state the amount of damages being sought. the prior owner accepts responsibility for the conduct of the defense of the cases and payment of any
amounts due to the claimants. in our eighteen-year experience with tendering these cases, we have not made any payment with respect to any tendered asbestos cases. we believe that the
prior owners have the intention and ability to continue to honor their indemnity obligations, although we cannot assure you that they will continue to do so or that we will not be liable for these
cases if they do not. 

f-80




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

19. commitments and contingencies (continued) 


the
following table presents for the periods indicated certain information about cases for which service has been received that we have tendered to the prior owner, all of which have
been accepted. 
 





















 
 
year ended december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


unresolved at beginning of period
 
 
1,116
 
 
1,138
 
 
1,140
 


tendered during period
 
 
10
 
 
24
 
 
18
 


resolved during period(1)
 
 
46
 
 
46
 
 
20
 


unresolved at end of period
 
 
1,080
 
 
1,116
 
 
1,138
 







 

 
(1)although
the indemnifying party informs us when tendered cases have been resolved, it generally does not inform us of the settlement amounts relating to
such cases, if any. the indemnifying party has informed us that it typically manages our defense together with the defense of other entities in such cases and resolves claims involving multiple
defendants simultaneously, and that it considers the allocation of settlement amounts, if any, among defendants to be confidential and proprietary. consequently, we are not able to provide the number
of cases resolved with payment by the indemnifying party or the amount of such payments. 
 
we
have never made any payments with respect to these cases. as of december 31, 2011, we had an accrued liability of $10 million relating to these cases and a corresponding
receivable of $10 million relating to our indemnity protection with respect to these cases. we cannot assure you that our liability will not exceed our accruals or that our liability associated
with these cases would not be material to our financial condition, results of operations or liquidity; accordingly, we are not able to estimate the amount or range of loss in excess of our accruals.
additional asbestos exposure claims may be made against us in the future, and such claims could be material. however, because we are not able to estimate the amount or range of losses associated with
such claims, we have made no accruals with respect to unasserted asbestos exposure claims as of december 31, 2011. 

certain
cases in which we are a premises defendant are not subject to indemnification by prior owners or operators. the following table presents for the periods indicated certain
information about these cases. cases include all cases for which service has been received by us. certain prior cases that were filed in error against us have been dismissed. 
 





















 
 
year ended december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


unresolved at beginning of period
 
 
37
 
 
39
 
 
43
 


filed during period
 
 
11
 
 
5
 
 
3
 


resolved during period
 
 
12
 
 
7
 
 
7
 


unresolved at end of period
 
 
36
 
 
37
 
 
39
 



 
we
paid gross settlement costs for asbestos exposure cases that are not subject to indemnification of $584,000 and $201,000 during the years ended december 31, 2011 and 2010,
respectively. as of december 31, 2011, we had an accrual of $460,000 relating to these cases. we cannot assure you that our liability will not exceed our accruals or that our liability
associated with these cases would not be 

f-81




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 


19. commitments and contingencies (continued) 

material
to our financial condition, results of operations or liquidity; accordingly, we are not able to estimate the amount or range of loss in excess of our accruals. additional asbestos exposure
claims may be made against us in the future, and such claims could be material. however, because we are not able to estimate the amount or range of losses associated with such claims, we have made no
accruals with respect to unasserted asbestos exposure claims as of december 31, 2011. 

antitrust matters  

we were named as a defendant in civil class action antitrust suits alleging that between 1999 and 2004 we conspired with bayer, basf,
dow and lyondell to fix the prices of mdi, tdi, polyether polyols, and related systems ("polyether polyol products") sold in the u.s. in violation of the federal sherman act. these cases are
consolidated as the "polyether polyols" cases in multidistrict litigation pending in the u.s. district court for the district of kansas. 

in
addition, we and the other polyether polyol defendants were named as defendants in three civil antitrust suits brought by certain direct purchasers of polyether polyol products that
opted out of the class certified in the kansas multidistrict litigation. the relevant time frame for these cases is 1994 to 2004 and they are referred to as the "direct action cases." the class action
and the direct action cases were consolidated in the kansas court for the purposes of discovery and other pretrial matters. 


in
the second quarter of 2011, we settled the class action and were dismissed as a defendant. on december 29, 2011, we entered into a settlement agreement with the direct action
plaintiffs for an amount immaterial to our financial statements and were dismissed from those cases on december 30, 2011. 

two
similar civil antitrust class action cases were filed may 5 and 17, 2006 in the superior court of justice, ontario canada and superior court, province of quebec, district of
quebec, on behalf of purported classes of canadian direct and indirect purchasers of mdi, tdi and polyether polyols. the class certification hearing is scheduled for april 2, 2012. 


a
purported class action case filed february 15, 2002 by purchasers in california of products containing rubber and urethane chemicals and pending in superior court of california,
county of san francisco is stayed pending resolution of the kansas multidistrict litigation. the plaintiffs in this matter make similar claims against the defendants as the class plaintiffs in the
kansas multidistrict litigation. 

we
have been named as a defendant in two purported class action civil antitrust suits alleging that we and our co-defendants and other co-conspirators conspired
to fix prices of titanium dioxide sold in the u.s. between at least march 1, 2002 and the present. the cases were filed on february 9 and 12, 2010 in the u.s. district court for the
district of maryland and a consolidated complaint was filed on april 12, 2010. the other defendants named in this matter are e.i. du pont de nemours and company, kronos worldwide inc.,
millennium inorganic chemicals, inc. and the national titanium dioxide company limited (d/b/a cristal). a class certification hearing is scheduled for august 16, 2012 and trial is set to
begin september 9, 2013. discovery is ongoing. 

in
all of the antitrust litigation currently pending against us, the plaintiffs generally are seeking injunctive relief, treble damages, costs of suit and attorneys fees. we are not
aware of any illegal 

f-82




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 


19. commitments and contingencies (continued) 

conduct
by us or any of our employees. nevertheless, we have incurred costs relating to these claims and could incur additional costs in amounts material to us. 

port arthur plant fire insurance litigation settlement  

on april 29, 2006, our former port arthur, texas olefins manufacturing plant (which we sold to flint hills resources in november
2007) experienced a major fire. the plant was covered by property damage and business interruption insurance through iric, our captive insurer, and the reinsurers. the property damage and business
interruption insurance was subject to a combined deductible of $60 million. we, together with iric, asserted claims to the reinsurers related to losses occurring as a result of this fire. on
august 31, 2007, the reinsurers brought an action against us in the u.s. district court for the southern district of texas. the action sought to compel us to arbitrate with the reinsurers to
resolve disputes related to our claims or, in the alternative, to declare judgment in favor of the reinsurers. pursuant to a december 29, 2008 agreement, we participated with the reinsurers in
binding arbitration. we paid our deductible on the claim of $60 million and were paid $365 million by the reinsurers prior to the commencement of binding arbitration. on may 14,
2010, we entered into a settlement agreement with the reinsurers, including those reinsurers that did not participate in the arbitration proceedings that resolved the remainder of our insurance claim
for a total amount of $110 million. the reinsurers completed the payment of this amount on june 15, 2010. for more information, see "note 25. discontinued
operations—u.s. base chemical business" to our consolidated financial statements. 

product delivery claim  

we have been notified by a customer of potential claims related to our allegedly delivering a different product from that which it had
ordered. our customer claims that it was unaware that the different product had been delivered until after it had been used to manufacture materials which were subsequently sold. the customer has
indicated that it has been notified of claims of up to an aggregate of approximately 150 million euros relating to this matter and believes that we may be responsible for all or a portion of
these claims. we are investigating this matter and based on the facts currently available to us, we believe that we are insured for any payments we may ultimately make in excess of $10 million.
however, no assurance can be given regarding our ultimate liability or costs to us. we have made no accrual with respect to this matter. 

other proceedings  

we are a party to various other proceedings instituted by private plaintiffs, governmental authorities and others arising under
provisions of applicable laws, including various environmental, products liability and other laws. except as otherwise disclosed in this report, we do not believe that the outcome of any of these
matters will have a material effect on our financial condition, results of operations or liquidity. 

f-83




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

20. environmental, health and safety matters  


environmental, health and safety matters  

general  

we are subject to extensive federal, state, local and international laws, regulations, rules and ordinances relating to safety,
pollution, protection of the environment, product management and distribution, and the generation, storage, handling, transportation, treatment, disposal and remediation of hazardous substances and
waste materials. in the ordinary course of business, we are subject to frequent environmental inspections and monitoring and occasional investigations by governmental enforcement authorities. in
addition, our production facilities require operating permits that are subject to renewal, modification and, in certain circumstances, revocation. actual or alleged violations of safety laws,
environmental laws or permit requirements could result in restrictions or prohibitions on plant operations or product distribution, substantial civil or criminal sanctions, as well as, under some
environmental laws, the assessment of strict liability and/or joint and several liability. moreover, changes in environmental regulations could inhibit or interrupt our operations, or require us to
modify our facilities or operations. accordingly, environmental or regulatory matters may cause us to incur significant unanticipated losses, costs or liabilities. 

environmental, health and safety systems  

we are committed to achieving and maintaining compliance with all applicable ehs legal requirements, and we have developed policies and
management systems that are intended to identify the multitude of ehs legal requirements applicable to our operations, enhance compliance with applicable legal requirements, ensure the safety of our
employees, contractors, community neighbors and customers and minimize the production and emission of wastes and other pollutants. although ehs legal requirements are constantly changing and are
frequently difficult to comply with, these ehs management systems are designed to assist us in our compliance goals while also fostering efficiency and improvement and minimizing overall risk to us. 

ehs capital expenditures  

we may incur future costs for capital improvements and general compliance under ehs laws, including costs to acquire, maintain and
repair pollution control equipment. for the years ended december 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009, our capital expenditures for ehs matters totaled $92 million, $85 million, and
$54 million, respectively. because capital expenditures for these matters are subject to evolving regulatory requirements and depend, in part, on the timing, promulgation and enforcement of
specific requirements, our capital expenditures for ehs matters have varied significantly from year to year and we cannot provide assurance that our recent expenditures will be indicative of future
amounts required under ehs laws. 

remediation liabilities  

we have incurred, and we may in the future incur, liability to investigate and clean up waste or contamination at our current or former
facilities or facilities operated by third parties at which we may have disposed of waste or other materials. similarly, we may incur costs for the cleanup of waste that 

f-84




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

20. environmental, health and safety matters (continued) 

was
disposed of prior to the purchase of our businesses. under some circumstances, the scope of our liability may extend to damages to natural resources. 

under
cercla and similar state laws, a current or former owner or operator of real property may be liable for remediation costs regardless of whether the release or disposal of hazardous
substances was in compliance with law at the time it occurred, and a current owner or operator may be liable regardless of whether it owned or operated the facility at the time of the release. outside
the u.s., analogous contaminated property laws, such as those in effect in france and australia, can hold past owners and/or operators liable for remediation at former facilities. we have been
notified by third parties of claims against us for cleanup liabilities at approximately 10 former facilities or third party sites, including, but not limited to, sites listed under cercla. based on
current information and past experiences at other cercla sites, we do not expect any of these third party claims to result in material liability to us. 

one
of these sites, the north maybe canyon mine cercla site, includes an abandoned phosphorous mine near soda springs, idaho believed to have been operated by one of our predecessor
companies (el paso products company). in 2004, the u.s. forest service notified us that we are a cercla prp for the mine site involving selenium contaminated surface water. under a 2004 administrative
order, the current mine lessee, nu-west industries, inc., began undertaking the investigation required for a cercla removal process. in 2008, the site was transitioned to the cercla
remedial action process, which requires a ri/fs. in 2009, the forest service notified the three prps (our company, nu-west and wells cargo) that it would undertake the ri/fs itself. on
february 19, 2010, in conjunction with wells cargo, we agreed to jointly comply with a unilateral administrative order a uao to conduct an ri/fs of the entire west ridge of the site, although
we are alleged to have had only a limited historical presence in the investigation area. in march 2010, following the initiation of litigation by nu-west, the forest service assumed
nu-west's original investigation obligations. on june 15, 2010, we received the uao which had been executed by the forest service and we are presently carrying out the requirements
of the order. we continue to coordinate with our insurers regarding policy coverage in this matter. at this time, we do not believe the costs to remediate this site will be material to our financial
statements. 

in
addition, under the rcra and similar state laws, we may be required to remediate contamination originating from our properties as a condition to our hazardous waste permit. some of
our manufacturing sites have an extended history of industrial chemical manufacturing and use, including on-site waste disposal. we are aware of soil, groundwater or surface contamination
from past operations at some of our sites, and we may find contamination at other sites in the future. for example, our port neches, texas, and geismar, louisiana, facilities are the subject of
ongoing remediation requirements under rcra authority. similar laws exist in a number of locations in which we currently operate, or previously operated, manufacturing facilities, such as australia,
switzerland and italy. 

in
june of 2006, an agreement was reached between the local regulatory authorities and our advanced materials site in pamplona, spain to relocate our manufacturing operations in order to
facilitate new urban development desired by the city. subsequently, as required by the authorities, soil and groundwater sampling was performed and followed by a quantitative risk assessment. in
october 2010, the local authorities approved our proposed two-phase remedial approach. the first phase was 

f-85




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

20. environmental, health and safety matters (continued) 

installed
in 2011 and involves groundwater extraction and treatment in one limited area of the site. the second phase, not yet defined, would proceed during site redevelopment. as the second phase
remediation has not yet been defined, we are unable to assess our potential liability. 

by
letter dated march 7, 2006, our base chemicals and polymers facility in west footscray, australia, was issued a clean-up notice by the epa victoria due to concerns
about soil and groundwater contamination emanating from the site. the agency revoked the original clean-up notice on september 4, 2007 and issued a revised clean-up
notice due to "the complexity of contamination issues" at the site. in the third quarter of 2009, we recorded a $30 million liability related to estimated environmental remediation costs at
this site. on august 23, 2010, epa victoria revoked the second clean-up notice and issued a revised notice that included a requirement for financial assurance for the remediation.
we have reached agreement with the agency that a mortgage on the land will be held by the agency as financial surety during the period covered by the current clean-up notice, which ends on
july 30, 2014. we can provide no assurance that the agency will not seek to institute additional requirements for the site or that additional costs will not be associated with the clean up.
this facility has been closed and demolished. 

by
letter dated march 15, 2010, doj notified us that the epa has requested that the doj bring an action in federal court against us and other prps for recovery of costs incurred
by the u.s. in connection with releases of hazardous substances from the state marine superfund site in port arthur, texas. as of august 31, 2007, the epa had incurred and paid approximately
$2.8 million in unreimbursed response costs related to the site. prior to filing the complaint, the doj requested that prps sign and return a standard tolling agreement (from march 31,
2010 through september 30, 2010) and participate in settlement discussions. we originally responded to an information request regarding this site on march 7, 2005 and identified
historical transactions associated with a predecessor of a company we acquired. the prior owners have contractually agreed to indemnify us in this matter. while the doj is aware of the indemnity, we
may be required to participate in future settlement discussions; therefore, on march 29, 2010, we submitted the signed tolling agreement and offer to negotiate to the doj. the tolling agreement
has since been extended three times, most recently through january 31, 2012. in a direct final rule published december 6, 2011, epa region 6 announced that it is delisting this superfund
site from the national priorities list. 

in
many cases, our potential liability arising from historical contamination is based on operations and other events occurring prior to our ownership of a business or specific facility.
in these situations, we frequently obtained an indemnity agreement from the prior owner addressing remediation liabilities arising from pre-closing conditions. we have successfully
exercised our rights under these contractual covenants for a number of sites and, where applicable, mitigated our ultimate remediation liability. we cannot assure you, however, that the liabilities
for all such matters subject to indemnity, will be honored by the prior owner or that our existing indemnities will be sufficient to cover our liabilities for such matters. 


based
on available information and the indemnification rights we believe are likely to be available, we believe that the costs to investigate and remediate known contamination will not
have a material effect on our financial statements. however, if such indemnities are not honored or do not fully cover the costs of investigation and remediation or we are required to contribute to
such costs, then such expenditures may have a material effect on our financial statements. at the current time, we are unable 

f-86




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 


20. environmental, health and safety matters (continued) 

to
estimate the total cost, exclusive of indemnification benefits, to remediate any of the known contamination sites. 

environmental reserves  

we have accrued liabilities relating to anticipated environmental cleanup obligations, site reclamation and closure costs and known
penalties. liabilities are recorded when potential liabilities are either known or considered probable and can be reasonably estimated. our liability estimates are calculated using present value
techniques as appropriate and are based upon requirements placed upon us by regulators, available facts, existing technology and past experience. the environmental liabilities do not include amounts
recorded as asset retirement obligations. we had accrued $36 million and $48 million for environmental liabilities as of december 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. of these
amounts, $7 million and $13 million were classified as accrued liabilities in our consolidated balance sheets as of december 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively, and
$29 million and $35 million were classified as other noncurrent liabilities in our consolidated balance sheets as of december 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. in certain cases,
our remediation liabilities may be payable over periods of up to 30 years. we may incur losses for environmental remediation in excess of the amounts accrued; however, we are not able to
estimate the amount or range of such potential excess. 

regulatory developments  

on june 1, 2007, the eu regulatory framework for chemicals called reach took effect, designed to be phased in over
11 years. as a reach-regulated company that manufactures in or imports more than one metric ton per year of a chemical substance into the eea, we were required to pre-register with
echa, such chemical substances and isolated intermediates to take advantage of the 11 year phase-in period. to meet our compliance obligations, a cross-business reach team was
established, through which we were able to fulfill all required pre-registrations and our first phase registrations by the november 30, 2010 deadline. while we continue our
registration efforts to meet the next registration deadline of june 2013, our reach implementation team is now strategically focused on the authorization phase of the reach process, directing its
efforts to address "substances of very high concern" and evaluating potential business implications. where warranted, evaluation of substitute chemicals will be an important element of our ongoing
manufacturing sustainability efforts. as a chemical manufacturer with global operations, we are also actively monitoring and addressing analogous regulatory regimes being considered or implemented
outside of the eu. 

although
the total long-term cost for reach compliance is unknown at this time, we spent approximately $5 million, $9 million and $3 million in 2011,
2010 and 2009, respectively, to meet the initial reach requirements. we cannot provide assurance that these recent expenditures are indicative of future amounts that we may be required to spend for
reach compliance. 

f-87






 




































 
table of contents 


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries  

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries  

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)  

20. environmental, health and safety matters (continued)  


greenhouse gas regulation  

although the existence of binding emissions limitations under international treaties such as the kyoto protocol is in doubt after 2012,
we expect some or all of our operations to be subject to regulatory requirements to reduce emissions of ghg. even in the absence of a new global agreement to limit ghgs, we may be subject to
additional regulation under the european union emissions trading system as well as new national and regional ghg trading programs. for example, our operations in australia and selected u.s. states may
be subject to future ghg regulations under emissions trading systems in those jurisdictions. 


because
the united states has not adopted federal climate change legislation, domestic ghg efforts are likely to be guided by epa regulations in the near future. while epa's ghg programs
are currently subject to judicial challenge, our domestic operations may become subject to epa's regulatory requirements when implemented. in particular, expansions of our existing facilities or
construction of new facilities may be subject to the clean air act's prevention of significant deterioration requirements under epa's ghg "tailoring rule." in addition, certain aspects of our
operations may be subject to ghg emissions monitoring and reporting requirements. if we are subject to epa ghg regulations, we may face increased monitoring, reporting, and compliance costs. 


we
are already managing and reporting ghg emissions, to varying degrees, as required by law for our sites in locations subject to kyoto protocol obligations and/or eu emissions trading
scheme requirements. although these sites are subject to existing ghg legislation, few have experienced or anticipate significant cost increases as a result of these programs, although it is possible
that ghg emission restrictions may increase over time. potential consequences of such restrictions include capital requirements to modify assets to meet ghg emission restrictions and/or increases in
energy costs
above the level of general inflation, as well as direct compliance costs. currently, however, it is not possible to estimate the likely financial impact of potential future regulation on any of our
sites. 

finally,
it should be noted that some scientists have concluded that increasing concentrations of ghg in the earth's atmosphere may produce climate changes that have significant physical
effects, such as increased frequency and severity of storms, droughts, and floods and other climatic events. if any of those effects were to occur, they could have an adverse effect on our assets and
operations. 

mtbe developments  

we produce mtbe, an oxygenate that is blended with gasoline to reduce vehicle air emissions and to enhance the octane rating of
gasoline. litigation or legislative initiatives restricting the use of mtbe in gasoline may subject us or our products to environmental liability or materially adversely affect our sales and costs.
because mtbe has contaminated some water supplies, its use has become controversial in the u.s. and elsewhere, and its use has been effectively eliminated in the u.s. market. we currently market mtbe,
either directly or through third parties, to gasoline additive customers located outside the u.s., although there are additional costs associated with such outside-u.s. sales which may
result in decreased profitability compared to historical sales in the u.s. we may also elect to use all or a portion of our precursor tba to produce saleable products other than mtbe. if we opt to
produce products other than mtbe, necessary modifications to our facilities will require significant 

f-88




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 


20. environmental, health and safety matters (continued) 

capital
expenditures and the sale of such other products may produce a lower level of cash flow than that historically produced from the sale of mtbe. 

numerous
companies, including refiners, manufacturers and sellers of gasoline, as well as manufacturers of mtbe, have been named as defendants in numerous cases in u.s. courts that
allege mtbe contamination in groundwater. the plaintiffs in the mtbe groundwater contamination cases generally seek compensatory damages, punitive damages, injunctive relief, such as monitoring and
abatement, and attorney fees. between 2007 and 2009, we were named as a defendant in 18 of these lawsuits in new york state and federal courts, which we settled in an amount immaterial to us. 


it
is possible that we could be named as a defendant in existing or future mtbe contamination cases. we cannot provide assurances that adverse results against us in existing or future
mtbe contamination cases will not have a material effect on our financial statements. 

india investigation  

during the third quarter of 2010, we completed an internal investigation of the operations of papl, our majority owned joint venture in
india. papl manufactures base liquid resins, base solid resins and formulated products in india. the investigation initially focused on allegations of illegal disposal of hazardous waste and waste
water discharge and related reporting irregularities. based upon preliminary findings, the investigation was expanded to include a review of the production and off-book sales of certain
products and waste products. the investigation included the legality under indian law and u.s. law, including the u.s. foreign corrupt practices act, of certain payments made by employees of the joint
venture to government officials in india. records at the facility covering nine months in 2009 and early 2010 show that less than $11,000 in payments were made to officials for that period; in
addition, payments in unknown amounts may have been made by individuals from the facility in previous years. 

in
may and july 2010, papl fully disclosed the environmental noncompliance issues to the local indian environmental agency, the tnpcb. all environmental compliance and reporting issues
have been addressed to the agency's satisfaction other than the use of freshwater for the dilution of wastewater effluent discharges and including the remediation of several off-site solid
waste disposal areas. both remaining issues are being addressed. at tnpcb's direction, we submitted a plan for the remediation of the off-site waste disposal areas, which the tnpcb
approved. the impacted off-site soil was excavated and relocated to the site. final commercial disposal methods for the removed waste await approval from tnpcb, although we do not
anticipate the costs to be material. 

also
in may 2010, we voluntarily contacted the sec and the doj to advise them of our investigation and that we intend to cooperate fully with each of them. we met with the sec and the
doj in october 2010 to discuss this matter and we continue to cooperate with these agencies. steps have been taken to halt all known illegal or improper activity, including the termination of
employment of management employees as appropriate. 

no
conclusions can be drawn at this time as to whether any government agencies will open formal investigations of these matters or what remedies such agencies may seek. governmental
agencies could assess material civil and criminal penalties and fines against papl and potentially against us and could issue orders that adversely affect the operations of papl. we cannot, however,
determine at this time 

f-89




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 


20. environmental, health and safety matters (continued) 

the
magnitude of the penalties and fines that could be assessed, the total costs to remediate the prior noncompliance or the effects of implementing any necessary corrective measures on
papl's operations. 

21. huntsman corporation stockholders' equity  

share repurchase program  

effective august 5, 2011, our board of directors authorized our company to repurchase up to $100 million in shares of our
common stock. during 2011, we acquired approximately four million shares of our outstanding common stock for approximately $50 million under the repurchase program. repurchases under this
program may be made through the open market or in privately negotiated transactions, and repurchases may be commenced or suspended from time to time without prior notice. shares of common stock
acquired through the repurchase program are held in treasury at cost. 


dividends on common stock  

the following tables represent dividends on common stock for our company for the years ended december 31, (dollars in millions,
except per share payment amounts): 
 




















 
 
2011 
 


payment date



 
 
record date 
 
per share
payment amount 
 
total amount
paid 
 


march 31, 2011
 
march 15, 2011
 
$
0.10
 
$
24
 


june 30, 2011
 
june 15, 2011
 
 
0.10
 
 
24
 


september 30, 2011
 
september 15, 2011
 
 
0.10
 
 
24
 


december 30, 2011
 
december 15, 2011
 
 
0.10
 
 
24
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
 
 
 
 
 
$
96
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
  
 





















 
 
2010 
 


payment date



 
 
record date 
 
per share
payment amount 
 
total amount
paid 
 


march 31, 2010
 
 
march 15, 2010
 
$
0.10
 
$
24
 


june 30, 2010
 
 
june 15, 2010
 
 
0.10
 
 
24
 


september 30, 2010
 
 
september 15, 2010
 
 
0.10
 
 
24
 


december 31, 2010
 
 
december 15, 2010
 
 
0.10
 
 
24
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
$
96
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
f-90




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 


21. huntsman corporation stockholders' equity (continued) 


 





















 
 
2009 
 


payment date



 
 
record date 
 
per share
payment amount 
 
total amount
paid 
 


march 31, 2009
 
 
march 16, 2009
 
$
0.10
 
$
24
 


june 30, 2009
 
 
june 15, 2009
 
 
0.10
 
 
24
 


september 30, 2009
 
 
september 15, 2009
 
 
0.10
 
 
24
 


december 31, 2009
 
 
december 15, 2009
 
 
0.10
 
 
24
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
$
96
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
22. stock-based compensation plan  


under the stock incentive plan, a plan approved by stockholders, we may grant non-qualified stock options, incentive stock options, stock appreciation rights, restricted
stock, phantom stock, performance awards and other stock-based awards to our employees, directors and consultants and to employees and consultants of our subsidiaries, provided that incentive stock
options may be granted solely to employees. the terms of the grants are fixed at the grant date. as of december 31, 2011, we were authorized to grant up to 32.6 million shares under the
stock incentive plan. as of december 31, 2011, we had 10.6 million shares remaining under the stock incentive plan available for grant. option awards have a maximum contractual term of
10 years and generally must have an exercise price at least equal to the market price of our common stock on the date the option award is granted. stock- based awards generally vest over a
three-year period. 

the
compensation cost from continuing operations under the stock incentive plan for our company and huntsman international were as follows (dollars in millions): 
 





















 
 
year ended december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


huntsman corporation
compensation cost
 
$
24
 
$
27
 
$
20
 


huntsman international
compensation cost
 
 
22
 
 
24
 
 
16
 



 
the
total income tax benefit recognized in the statement of operations for stock-based compensation arrangements was $6 million, $8 million and $6 million for the
years ended december 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 respectively. 

the
fair value of each stock option award is estimated on the date of grant using the black-scholes valuation model that uses the assumptions noted in the following table. expected
volatilities are based on the historical volatility of our common stock through the grant date. the expected term of options granted was estimated based on the contractual term of the instruments and
employees' expected exercise and post-vesting employment termination behavior. the risk-free rate for periods within the contractual life of the option was based on the u.s.
treasury yield curve in effect at the time 

f-91




 


table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 


22. stock-based compensation plan (continued) 

of
grant. the assumptions noted below represent the weighted averages of the assumptions utilized for all stock options granted during the year. 
 





















 
 
year ended december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


dividend yield
 
 
2.3
%
 
3.0
%
 
15.4
%


expected volatility
 
 
65.6
%
 
69.0
%
 
70.4
%


risk-free interest rate
 
 
2.8
%
 
3.1
%
 
2.5
%


expected life of stock options granted during the period
 
 
6.6 years
 
 
6.6 years
 
 
6.6 years
 



 
stock options  


a summary of stock option activity under the stock incentive plan as of december 31, 2011 and changes during the year then ended
is presented below: 
 
























option awards



 
 
shares 
 
weighted
average
exercise
price 
 
weighted
average
remaining
contractual
term 
 
aggregate
intrinsic
value 
 


 
 
(in thousands)
 
 
 
(years)
 
(in millions)
 


outstanding at january 1, 2011
 
 
10,997
 
$
12.28
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


granted
 
 
953
 
 
17.51
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


exercised
 
 
(1,268
)
 
2.82
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


forfeited
 
 
(337
)
 
15.14
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


outstanding at december 31, 2011
 
 
10,345
 
 
13.83
 
 
5.9
 
$
27
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


exercisable at december 31, 2011
 
 
7,089
 
 
16.34
 
 
5.0
 
 
13
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
the
weighted-average grant-date fair value of stock options granted during 2011, 2010 and 2009 was $9.17, $6.97 and $0.51 per option, respectively. as of december 31,
2011, there was $8 million of total unrecognized compensation cost related to nonvested stock option arrangements granted under the stock incentive plan. that cost is expected to be recognized
over a weighted-average period of approximately 0.6 years. 

during
2009 no stock options were exercised. during the year ended december 31, 2011 and 2010, the total intrinsic value of stock options exercised was $19 million and
$14 million, respectively. 



nonvested shares  



nonvested shares granted under the stock incentive plan consist of restricted stock, which is accounted for as an equity award, and
phantom stock, which is accounted for as a liability award 

f-92




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 


22. stock-based compensation plan (continued) 

because
it can be settled in either stock or cash. a summary of the status of our nonvested shares as of december 31, 2011 and changes during the year then ended is presented below: 
 
























 
 
equity awards 
 
liability awards 
 


 
 
shares 
 
weighted
average
grant-date
fair value 
 
shares 
 
weighted
average
grant-date
fair value 
 


 
 
(in thousands)
 
 
 
(in thousands)
 
 
 


nonvested at january 1, 2011
 
 
3,126
 
$
6.95
 
 
1,642
 
$
6.05
 


granted
 
 
675
 
 
17.55
 
 
311
 
 
17.59
 


vested
 
 
(1,500)
(1)
 
7.20
 
 
(729
)
 
5.55
 


forfeited
 
 
(14
)
 
4.98
 
 
(124
)
 
7.99
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


nonvested at december 31, 2011
 
 
2,287
 
 
9.92
 
 
1,100
 
 
9.42
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 







 

 
(1)as
of december 31, 2011, a total of 444,177 restricted stock units were vested, of which 115,045 vested during 2011. only 176,327 of these shares
have been reflected as vested shares in this table because, in accordance with the restricted stock unit agreements, shares of common stock are not issued for vested restricted stock units until
termination of employment. 
 
as
of december 31, 2011, there was $16 million of total unrecognized compensation cost related to nonvested share compensation arrangements granted under the stock
incentive plan. that cost is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of approximately 0.9 years. the value of share awards that vested during the years ended
december 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 was $23 million, $18 million and $12 million, respectively. 

23. other comprehensive (loss) income  



other comprehensive (loss) income consisted of the following (dollars in millions): 

huntsman corporation  
 



























 
 
december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


 
 
accumulated
income (loss) 
 
(loss)
income 
 
accumulated
income (loss) 
 
income
(loss) 
 
income
(loss) 
 


foreign currency translation adjustments, net of tax of $24 and $25 as of december 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively
 
$
218
 
$
(80
)
$
298
 
$
24
 
$
70
 


pension and other postretirement benefits adjustments, net of tax $124 and $92 as of december 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively
 
 
(800
)
 
(187
)
 
(613
)
 
(33
)
 
133
 


other comprehensive income (loss) of unconsolidated affiliates
 
 
8
 
 
1
 
 
7
 
 
—
 
 
(2
)


other, net
 
 
3
 
 
(1
)
 
4
 
 
(2
)
 
2
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
 
(571
)
 
(267
)
 
(304
)
 
(11
)
 
203
 


amounts attributable to noncontrolling interests
 
 
12
 
 
5
 
 
7
 
 
1
 
 
(1
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


amounts attributable to huntsman corporation
 
$
(559
)
$
(262
)
$
(297
)
$
(10
)
$
202
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
f-93






 




































 
table of contents 


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries  

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries  

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)  

23. other comprehensive (loss) income (continued)  

huntsman international  
 



























 
 
december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


 
 
accumulated
income (loss) 
 
(loss)
income 
 
accumulated
income (loss) 
 
income
(loss) 
 
income
(loss) 
 


foreign currency translation adjustments, net of tax of $11 and $12 as of december 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively
 
$
217
 
$
(79
)
$
296
 
$
23
 
$
71
 


pension and other postretirement benefits adjustments, net of tax $156 and $124 as of december 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively
 
 
(845
)
 
(182
)
 
(663
)
 
(28
)
 
136
 


other comprehensive income (loss) of unconsolidated affiliates
 
 
8
 
 
1
 
 
7
 
 
—
 
 
(2
)


other, net
 
 
(3
)
 
(2
)
 
(1
)
 
(2
)
 
2
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
 
(623
)
 
(262
)
 
(361
)
 
(7
)
 
207
 


amounts attributable to noncontrolling interests
 
 
12
 
 
5
 
 
7
 
 
1
 
 
(1
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


amounts attributable to huntsman international llc
 
$
(611
)
$
(257
)
$
(354
)
$
(6
)
$
206
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
items of other comprehensive (loss) income of our company and our consolidated affiliates have been recorded net of tax, with the exception of the
foreign currency translation adjustments related to subsidiaries with earnings permanently reinvested. the tax effect is determined based upon the jurisdiction where the income or loss was recognized
and is net of valuation allowances. 


24. (expenses) income associated with the terminated merger and related litigation  


total (expenses) income associated with the terminated merger and related litigation were as follows (dollars in millions): 
 





















 
 
december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


gain recognized pursuant to the texas bank litigation settlement agreement
 
$
—
 
$
—
 
$
868
 


directors' fees
 
 
—
 
 
(3
)
 
—
 


legal fees and other
 
 
—
 
 
(1
)
 
(33
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total (expenses) income
 
$
—
 
$
(4
)
$
835
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
on
july 12, 2007, we entered into an agreement and plan of merger with hexion (the "hexion merger agreement"). on june 18, 2008, hexion, apollo and certain of their
affiliates filed an action in delaware chancery court seeking to terminate the hexion merger. we countersued hexion and apollo in the delaware chancery court and filed a separate action against apollo
and certain of its affiliates in the district court of montgomery county, texas. on december 13, 2008, we terminated the hexion merger agreement and, on december 14, 2008, we entered
into the apollo settlement
agreement to settle the terminated merger-related litigation and certain other related matters. pursuant to the apollo settlement agreement, hexion and certain apollo affiliates have paid us an
aggregate of $1 billion. 

f-94




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

24. (expenses) income associated with the terminated merger and related litigation (continued) 

on
september 30, 2008, we filed suit in the 9th judicial district court in montgomery county, texas against the banks that had entered into a commitment letter to provide
funding for the hexion merger. on june 22, 2009, we entered into the texas bank litigation settlement agreement with such banks. this litigation was dismissed with prejudice on june 23,
2009. in accordance with the texas bank litigation settlement agreement, the banks paid us a cash payment of $632 million, purchased the $600 million aggregate principal amount 5.5% 2016
senior notes from huntsman international, and provided huntsman international with term loan c in the principal amount of $500 million. the 2016 senior notes and term loan c borrowings were at
favorable rates to us and were recorded at a combined fair value of $864 million. accordingly, we recognized a gain of $868 million in connection with the texas bank litigation
settlement agreement. on september 21, 2010, the board of directors approved bonuses totaling $3 million to certain members of the board of directors, upon the recommendation of an
independent committee of the board of directors, for their efforts in connection with the litigation with hexion and apollo following the terminated merger. 

25. discontinued operations  

australia styrenics business shutdown  

during the first quarter of 2010, we ceased operation of our former australian styrenics business. during 2009, we recorded costs of
approximately $63 million related to the closure of this business. u.s. tax law, under relevant facts, provides for a deduction on investments that are "worthless" for u.s. tax purposes.
therefore, during 2009, we recorded a tax benefit of $74 million in discontinued operations related to the closure of and the cumulative u.s. investments in our australian styrenics business.
during 2010, we recorded additional closure costs of $6 million. also during 2010, we recorded a $19 million loss from the recognition of cumulative currency translation losses upon the
liquidation and substantial liquidation of foreign entities related to this business. furthermore, we recorded an additional tax benefit of $28 million in 2010 related to the closure of this
business. the following results of operations of our former australian styrenics business have been presented as discontinued operations in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations
(dollars in millions): 
 





















 
 
year ended december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


revenues
 
$
38
 
$
52
 
$
98
 


operating costs and expenses
 
 
(44
)
 
(85
)
 
(182
)


nonoperating expense
 
 
—
 
 
(19
)
 
—
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


loss before income taxes
 
 
(6
)
 
(52
)
 
(84
)


income tax benefit
 
 
2
 
 
28
 
 
74
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


loss from discontinued operations, net of tax
 
$
(4
)
$
(24
)
$
(10
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
in
2006, product defect actions were filed against our subsidiary huntsman chemical company australia pty limited ("hcca") in australian courts relating to the sale and supply of vinyl
ester resins that were used in the manufacture of fiberglass swimming pools. hcca ceased manufacturing 

f-95




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

25. discontinued operations (continued) 

these
specific resin formulations by 2004 and sold the business that manufactured and sold these resins in 2007. 


during
the first quarter of 2011, hcca increased its estimate of probable loss related to these claims and recorded a liability for the full estimated value of the claims and a
corresponding receivable relating to our indemnity protection with a net charge to discontinued operations for any potential shortfall in insurance coverage. following mediation held in august 2011,
hcca and its insurers reached an agreement with two claimants to settle their claims for amounts within our insurance coverage after our self-insured retention was satisfied. accordingly,
during the third quarter of 2011, hcca reduced its estimate of probable loss proportionately and reversed a portion of the liability related to this matter. the settlements were paid in the fourth
quarter of 2011. our insurers continue to defend us in one remaining claim, but we do not believe that a resolution of the claim would be material to our financial statements. 

the
results of our former australian styrenics business were previously included in our corporate and other segment and have been presented as discontinued operations in the accompanying
consolidated statements of operations for all periods presented. 

u.s. base chemicals business  

on november 5, 2007, we completed a disposition of our u.s. base chemicals businesses, which included our former olefins
manufacturing assets located at port arthur, texas. a captive ethylene unit at the retained port neches, texas site of our performance products segment operations was not included in the sale. this
asset, along with a long-term post-closing arrangement for the supply of ethylene and propylene from flint hills resources to us, will continue to provide feedstock for our
downstream derivative units. 

the
following results of our former u.s base chemicals business have been presented as discontinued operations in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations (dollars in
millions): 
 





















 
 
year ended december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


other (expenses) income
 
$
(1
)
$
(6
)
$
2
 


gain (loss) on insurance settlements, net
 
 
—
 
 
110
 
 
(17
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


(loss) income before income taxes
 
 
(1
)
 
104
 
 
(15
)


income tax (expense) benefit
 
 
—
 
 
(38
)
 
6
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


(loss) income from discontinued operations, net of tax
 
$
(1
)
$
66
 
$
(9
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
during
2009, we recorded legal fees of $17 million for the arbitration of the fire insurance claim related to the 2006 fire at our former port arthur, texas facility and recorded
a gain of $2 million on the settlement of product exchange liabilities. during 2010, we recorded a $110 million pretax gain in connection with the final settlement of insurance claims
related to the 2006 fire at our former port arthur, texas plant and a pretax gain of $7 million from the settlement of insurance claims related to the 2005 gulf coast storms. of the
$110 million payment, $34 million was reflected within the statement 

f-96




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

25. discontinued operations (continued) 

of
cash flows as cash flows from investing activities and the remaining $76 million was reflected as cash flows from operating activities. the results of our former u.s. base chemicals business
are included in discontinued operations for all periods presented. these 2010 insurance settlement gains were offset in part by income taxes and legal fees related to the arbitration of the fire
insurance claim. 

26. related party transactions  


our accompanying consolidated financial statements include the following transactions with our affiliates not otherwise disclosed (dollars in millions): 
 





















 
 
year ended december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


sales to:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


unconsolidated affiliates
 
$
180
 
$
201
 
$
96
 


inventory purchases from:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


unconsolidated affiliates
 
 
465
 
 
369
 
 
273
 



 
an
agreement was reached prior to the initial public offering of our common stock in february 2005 with the huntsman foundation, a private charitable foundation established by jon m. and
karen h. huntsman to further the charitable interests of the huntsman family, that we would donate our salt lake city office building and our option to acquire an adjacent undeveloped parcel of
land to the foundation free of debt. on march 24, 2010, we completed this donation. at the time of the donation, the building had an appraised value of approximately $10 million. we
continue to occupy and use a portion of the building under a lease pursuant to which we make annual lease payments of approximately $2 million to the huntsman foundation. during 2011 and 2010,
we made payments of approximately $2 million and $1 million, respectively, to the huntsman foundation under the lease. the lease expires on december 31, 2013, subject to two
five-year extensions, at our option. 

through
may 2002, we paid the premiums on various life insurance policies for jon m. huntsman. these policies have been liquidated, and the cash values have been paid to
mr. huntsman. mr. huntsman is indebted to us in the amount of approximately $2 million, which represents the insurance premiums paid on his behalf through may 2002. this amount is
included in other noncurrent assets on the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. 


wayne
a. reaud, a member of our board of directors, is of counsel to the law firm of reaud, morgan & quinn. we pay the firm $200,000 per year for legal services. mr. reaud
has no interest in the firm or in the proceeds for current work done at the firm. as of counsel, the law firm provides mr. reaud with an office and certain secretarial services. 

27. operating segment information  


we derive our revenues, earnings and cash flows from the manufacture and sale of a wide variety of differentiated and commodity chemical products. during the first quarter of 2010, we
began reporting our lifo inventory valuation reserves as part of corporate and other; these reserves were previously reported in our performance products segment. during the third quarter of 2010, we
began reporting the amounts outstanding under the a/r programs and certain purchase accounting 

f-97




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

27. operating segment information (continued) 

adjustments
as part of our polyurethanes, performance products, advanced materials, textile effects and pigments segments' assets. these amounts were previously reported as corporate and other segment
assets. in addition, we eliminated intercompany balances from the assets of each reportable segment. during the fourth quarter of 2010, we began reporting the (income) loss attributable to
noncontrolling interests in the reporting segment to which the subsidiary relates. previously, (income) loss attributable to noncontrolling interests was reported in our corporate and other segment.
all relevant information for prior periods has been reclassified to reflect these changes. 

we
have reported our operations through five segments: polyurethanes, advanced materials, textile effects, performance products and pigments. we have organized our business and derived
our operating segments around differences in product lines. 

the
major products of each reportable operating segment are as follows: 
 













segment



 
 
products 


polyurethanes
 
mdi, po, polyols, pg, tpu, aniline and mtbe


performance products
 
amines, surfactants, lab, maleic anhydride, other performance chemicals, eg, olefins and technology licenses


advanced materials
 
epoxy resin compounds and formulations; cross-linking, matting and curing agents; epoxy, acrylic and polyurethane- based adhesives and tooling resin formulations


textile effects
 
textile chemicals and dyes


pigments
 
titanium dioxide



 
f-98






 




































 
table of contents 


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries  

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries  

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)  

27. operating segment information (continued)  


sales between segments are generally recognized at external market prices and are eliminated in consolidation. we use ebitda to measure the financial performance of our global business
units and for reporting the results of our operating segments. this measure includes all operating items relating to the businesses. the ebitda of operating segments excludes items that principally
apply to our company as a whole. the revenues and ebitda for each of our reportable operating segments are as follows (dollars in millions): 
 





















 
 
year ended december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


net sales:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


polyurethanes
 
$
4,434
 
$
3,605
 
$
3,005
 


performance products
 
 
3,301
 
 
2,659
 
 
2,090
 


advanced materials
 
 
1,372
 
 
1,244
 
 
1,059
 


textile effects
 
 
737
 
 
787
 
 
691
 


pigments
 
 
1,642
 
 
1,213
 
 
960
 


eliminations
 
 
(265
)
 
(258
)
 
(140
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
$
11,221
 
$
9,250
 
$
7,665
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


huntsman corporation:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


segment ebitda(1):
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


polyurethanes
 
$
469
 
$
319
 
$
388
 


performance products
 
 
385
 
 
363
 
 
246
 


advanced materials
 
 
125
 
 
143
 
 
59
 


textile effects
 
 
(199
)
 
1
 
 
(64
)


pigments
 
 
501
 
 
205
 
 
(25
)


corporate and other(2)
 
 
(236
)
 
(384
)
 
651
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


subtotal
 
 
1,045
 
 
647
 
 
1,255
 


discontinued operations(3)
 
 
(6
)
 
53
 
 
(97
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
 
1,039
 
 
700
 
 
1,158
 


interest expense, net
 
 
(249
)
 
(229
)
 
(238
)


income tax expense—continuing operations
 
 
(109
)
 
(29
)
 
(444
)


income tax benefit (expense)—discontinued operations
 
 
5
 
 
(10
)
 
80
 


depreciation and amortization
 
 
(439
)
 
(405
)
 
(442
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net income attributable to huntsman corporation
 
$
247
 
$
27
 
$
114
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


depreciation and amortization:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


polyurethanes
 
$
160
 
$
155
 
$
160
 


performance products
 
 
110
 
 
92
 
 
78
 


advanced materials
 
 
33
 
 
33
 
 
38
 


textile effects
 
 
27
 
 
26
 
 
19
 


pigments
 
 
74
 
 
67
 
 
104
 


corporate and other(2)
 
 
35
 
 
31
 
 
41
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


subtotal
 
 
439
 
 
404
 
 
440
 


discontinued operations
 
 
—
 
 
1
 
 
2
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
$
439
 
$
405
 
$
442
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
f-99




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 


27. operating segment information (continued) 


 





















 
 
year ended
december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


capital expenditures:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


polyurethanes
 
$
85
 
$
59
 
$
55
 


performance products
 
 
96
 
 
66
 
 
70
 


advanced materials
 
 
39
 
 
24
 
 
14
 


textile effects
 
 
34
 
 
23
 
 
19
 


pigments
 
 
57
 
 
49
 
 
23
 


corporate and other(2)
 
 
19
 
 
15
 
 
8
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
$
330
 
$
236
 
$
189
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
  
 


















 
 
december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 


total assets:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


polyurethanes
 
$
3,144
 
$
3,095
 


performance products
 
 
2,348
 
 
2,077
 


advanced materials
 
 
1,307
 
 
1,327
 


textile effects
 
 
686
 
 
776
 


pigments
 
 
1,428
 
 
1,330
 


corporate and other(2)
 
 
(256
)
 
109
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
$
8,657
 
$
8,714
 


 
 
 
 
 
 



 
f-100




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 


27. operating segment information (continued) 


 





















 
 
year ended december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


huntsman international:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


segment ebitda(1):
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


polyurethanes
 
$
469
 
$
319
 
$
388
 


performance products
 
 
385
 
 
363
 
 
246
 


advanced materials
 
 
125
 
 
143
 
 
59
 


textile effects
 
 
(199
)
 
1
 
 
(64
)


pigments
 
 
501
 
 
205
 
 
(25
)


corporate and other(2)
 
 
(236
)
 
(224
)
 
(178
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


subtotal
 
 
1,045
 
 
807
 
 
426
 


discontinued operations(3)
 
 
(6
)
 
53
 
 
(97
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
 
1,039
 
 
860
 
 
329
 


interest expense, net
 
 
(262
)
 
(248
)
 
(240
)


income tax expense—continuing operations
 
 
(113
)
 
(40
)
 
(159
)


income tax benefit (expense)—discontinued operations
 
 
5
 
 
(10
)
 
80
 


depreciation and amortization
 
 
(416
)
 
(382
)
 
(420
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net income (loss) attributable to huntsman international llc
 
$
253
 
$
180
 
$
(410
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


depreciation and amortization:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


polyurethanes
 
$
160
 
$
155
 
$
160
 


performance products
 
 
110
 
 
92
 
 
78
 


advanced materials
 
 
33
 
 
33
 
 
38
 


textile effects
 
 
27
 
 
26
 
 
19
 


pigments
 
 
74
 
 
67
 
 
104
 


corporate and other(2)
 
 
12
 
 
8
 
 
19
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


subtotal
 
 
416
 
 
381
 
 
418
 


discontinued operations
 
 
—
 
 
1
 
 
2
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
$
416
 
$
382
 
$
420
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


capital expenditures:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


polyurethanes
 
$
85
 
$
59
 
$
55
 


performance products
 
 
96
 
 
66
 
 
70
 


advanced materials
 
 
39
 
 
24
 
 
14
 


textile effects
 
 
34
 
 
23
 
 
19
 


pigments
 
 
57
 
 
49
 
 
23
 


corporate and other(2)
 
 
19
 
 
15
 
 
8
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
$
330
 
$
236
 
$
189
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
f-101




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 


27. operating segment information (continued) 


 


















 
 
december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 


total assets:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


polyurethanes
 
$
3,086
 
$
3,024
 


performance products
 
 
2,340
 
 
2,067
 


advanced materials
 
 
1,307
 
 
1,327
 


textile effects
 
 
686
 
 
776
 


pigments
 
 
1,384
 
 
1,277
 


corporate and other(2)
 
 
(473
)
 
(164
)


 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
$
8,330
 
$
8,307
 


 
 
 
 
 
 







 

 
(1)segment
ebitda is defined as net income (loss) attributable to huntsman corporation or huntsman international llc, as appropriate, before interest,
income tax, depreciation and amortization, and certain corporate and other items.
(2)corporate
and other includes unallocated corporate overhead, unallocated foreign exchange gains and losses, lifo inventory valuation reserve adjustments,
loss on early extinguishment of debt, (expenses) income associated with the terminated merger and related litigation (huntsman corporation only), unallocated restructuring, impairment and plant
closing costs and non-operating income and expense.
(3)the
operating results of our former polymers, base chemicals and australian styrenics businesses are classified as discontinued operations, and,
accordingly, the revenues of these businesses are excluded for all periods presented. the ebitda of our former polymers, base chemicals and australian styrenics businesses are included in discontinued
operations for all periods presented. for more information, see "note 25. discontinued operations." 
 

 





















 
 
year ended december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


by geographic area
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


revenues(1):
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


united states
 
$
3,470
 
$
2,777
 
$
2,345
 


china
 
 
944
 
 
881
 
 
561
 


mexico
 
 
723
 
 
485
 
 
432
 


germany
 
 
638
 
 
519
 
 
433
 


italy
 
 
558
 
 
474
 
 
415
 


other nations
 
 
4,888
 
 
4,114
 
 
3,479
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
$
11,221
 
$
9,250
 
$
7,665
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
f-102




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 


27. operating segment information (continued) 


 


















 
 
december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 


long-lived assets(2):
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


huntsman corporation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


united states
 
$
1,390
 
$
1,441
 


the netherlands
 
 
310
 
 
311
 


united kingdom
 
 
306
 
 
320
 


saudi arabia
 
 
243
 
 
259
 


germany
 
 
205
 
 
68
 


switzerland
 
 
166
 
 
221
 


spain
 
 
157
 
 
173
 


other nations
 
 
845
 
 
812
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
$
3,622
 
$
3,605
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


huntsman international
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


united states
 
$
1,278
 
$
1,305
 


the netherlands
 
 
310
 
 
311
 


united kingdom
 
 
306
 
 
320
 


saudi arabia
 
 
243
 
 
259
 


germany
 
 
205
 
 
68
 


switzerland
 
 
166
 
 
221
 


spain
 
 
157
 
 
173
 


other nations
 
 
845
 
 
812
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total
 
$
3,510
 
$
3,469
 


 
 
 
 
 
 







 

 
(1)geographic
information for revenues is based upon countries into which product is sold.
(2)long-lived
assets are made up of property, plant and equipment, net. 
 
f-103






 



































 




table of contents 


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries  

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries  

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)  

28. condensed consolidating financial information—huntsman international  



the following condensed consolidating financial statements present, in separate columns, financial information for the following: huntsman international llc (on a parent only
basis), with its investment in subsidiaries recorded under the equity method; the guarantors on a combined, and where appropriate, consolidated basis; and the non-guarantors on a combined,
and where appropriate, consolidated basis. additional columns present eliminating adjustments and consolidated totals as of december 31, 2011 and 2010 and for the years ended
december 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009. there are no contractual restrictions limiting transfers of cash from guarantor subsidiaries to huntsman international. each of the guarantors is 100% owned by
huntsman international and has fully and unconditionally guaranteed huntsman international's outstanding notes on a joint and several basis. 

f-104




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

28. condensed consolidating financial information—huntsman international (continued) 

 
 
huntsman international llc and subsidiaries  condensed consolidating balance sheets  as of december 31, 2011  (dollars in millions)        
 



























 
 
parent
company 
 
guarantors 
 
nonguarantors 
 
eliminations 
 
consolidated
huntsman
international
llc 
 


assets
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


current assets:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


cash and cash equivalents
 
$
4
 
$
—
 
$
227
 
$
—
 
$
231
 


restricted cash
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
8
 
 
—
 
 
8
 


accounts and notes receivable, net
 
 
13
 
 
151
 
 
1,365
 
 
—
 
 
1,529
 


accounts receivable from affiliates
 
 
1,105
 
 
3,041
 
 
93
 
 
(4,091
)
 
148
 


inventories
 
 
105
 
 
271
 
 
1,167
 
 
(4
)
 
1,539
 


prepaid expenses
 
 
9
 
 
7
 
 
43
 
 
(13
)
 
46
 


deferred income taxes
 
 
6
 
 
—
 
 
49
 
 
(15
)
 
40
 


other current assets
 
 
90
 
 
9
 
 
222
 
 
(101
)
 
220
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total current assets
 
 
1,332
 
 
3,479
 
 
3,174
 
 
(4,224
)
 
3,761
 


property, plant and equipment, net
 
 
393
 
 
868
 
 
2,247
 
 
2
 
 
3,510
 


investment in unconsolidated affiliates
 
 
5,286
 
 
1,460
 
 
147
 
 
(6,691
)
 
202
 


intangible assets, net
 
 
42
 
 
2
 
 
52
 
 
(3
)
 
93
 


goodwill
 
 
(16
)
 
82
 
 
48
 
 
—
 
 
114
 


deferred income taxes
 
 
154
 
 
—
 
 
191
 
 
(182
)
 
163
 


notes receivable from affiliates
 
 
20
 
 
920
 
 
5
 
 
(940
)
 
5
 


other noncurrent assets
 
 
81
 
 
137
 
 
264
 
 
—
 
 
482
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total assets
 
$
7,292
 
$
6,948
 
$
6,128
 
$
(12,038
)
$
8,330
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


liabilities and equity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


current liabilities:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


accounts payable
 
$
53
 
$
205
 
$
604
 
$
—
 
$
862
 


accounts payable to affiliates
 
 
2,244
 
 
822
 
 
1,089
 
 
(4,091
)
 
64
 


accrued liabilities
 
 
117
 
 
204
 
 
487
 
 
(114
)
 
694
 


deferred income taxes
 
 
—
 
 
39
 
 
7
 
 
(17
)
 
29
 


note payable to affiliate
 
 
100
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
100
 


current portion of debt
 
 
33
 
 
—
 
 
179
 
 
—
 
 
212
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total current liabilities
 
 
2,547
 
 
1,270
 
 
2,366
 
 
(4,222
)
 
1,961
 


long-term debt
 
 
3,128
 
 
—
 
 
602
 
 
—
 
 
3,730
 


notes payable to affiliates
 
 
435
 
 
—
 
 
944
 
 
(940
)
 
439
 


deferred income taxes
 
 
9
 
 
79
 
 
98
 
 
(80
)
 
106
 


other noncurrent liabilities
 
 
196
 
 
163
 
 
644
 
 
—
 
 
1,003
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total liabilities
 
 
6,315
 
 
1,512
 
 
4,654
 
 
(5,242
)
 
7,239
 


equity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


huntsman international llc members'
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


equity:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


members' equity
 
 
3,081
 
 
4,754
 
 
2,343
 
 
(7,097
)
 
3,081
 


accumulated deficit
 
 
(1,493
)
 
(820
)
 
(396
)
 
1,216
 
 
(1,493
)


accumulated other comprehensive (loss) income
 
 
(611
)
 
1,502
 
 
(546
)
 
(956
)
 
(611
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total huntsman international llc members' equity
 
 
977
 
 
5,436
 
 
1,401
 
 
(6,837
)
 
977
 


noncontrolling interests in subsidiaries
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
73
 
 
41
 
 
114
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total equity
 
 
977
 
 
5,436
 
 
1,474
 
 
(6,796
)
 
1,091
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total liabilities and equity
 
$
7,292
 
$
6,948
 
$
6,128
 
$
(12,038
)
$
8,330
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
f-105




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

28. condensed consolidating financial information—huntsman international (continued) 

 
 
huntsman international llc and subsidiaries  condensed consolidating balance sheets  as of december 31, 2010  (dollars in millions)        
 



























 
 
parent
company 
 
guarantors 
 
nonguarantors 
 
eliminations 
 
consolidated
huntsman
international
llc 
 


assets
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


current assets:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


cash and cash equivalents
 
$
220
 
$
9
 
$
332
 
$
—
 
$
561
 


restricted cash
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
7
 
 
—
 
 
7
 


accounts and notes receivable, net
 
 
17
 
 
112
 
 
1,284
 
 
—
 
 
1,413
 


accounts receivable from affiliates
 
 
1,275
 
 
2,530
 
 
79
 
 
(3,784
)
 
100
 


inventories
 
 
78
 
 
240
 
 
1,089
 
 
(11
)
 
1,396
 


prepaid expenses
 
 
11
 
 
6
 
 
42
 
 
(14
)
 
45
 


deferred income taxes
 
 
5
 
 
—
 
 
44
 
 
(9
)
 
40
 


other current assets
 
 
—
 
 
3
 
 
160
 
 
(3
)
 
160
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total current assets
 
 
1,606
 
 
2,900
 
 
3,037
 
 
(3,821
)
 
3,722
 


property, plant and equipment, net
 
 
417
 
 
881
 
 
2,169
 
 
2
 
 
3,469
 


investment in unconsolidated affiliates
 
 
5,018
 
 
1,403
 
 
172
 
 
(6,359
)
 
234
 


intangible assets, net
 
 
62
 
 
3
 
 
42
 
 
—
 
 
107
 


goodwill
 
 
(17
)
 
84
 
 
27
 
 
—
 
 
94
 


deferred income taxes
 
 
(9
)
 
—
 
 
161
 
 
27
 
 
179
 


notes receivable from affiliates
 
 
51
 
 
930
 
 
7
 
 
(981
)
 
7
 


other noncurrent assets
 
 
73
 
 
169
 
 
253
 
 
—
 
 
495
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total assets
 
$
7,201
 
$
6,370
 
$
5,868
 
$
(11,132
)
$
8,307
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


liabilities and equity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


current liabilities:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


accounts payable
 
$
42
 
$
212
 
$
586
 
$
—
 
$
840
 


accounts payable to affiliates
 
 
1,892
 
 
860
 
 
1,091
 
 
(3,784
)
 
59
 


accrued liabilities
 
 
102
 
 
77
 
 
464
 
 
(17
)
 
626
 


deferred income taxes
 
 
—
 
 
55
 
 
19
 
 
(11
)
 
63
 


note payable to affiliate
 
 
100
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
100
 


current portion of debt
 
 
114
 
 
—
 
 
405
 
 
—
 
 
519
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total current liabilities
 
 
2,250
 
 
1,204
 
 
2,565
 
 
(3,812
)
 
2,207
 


long-term debt
 
 
3,320
 
 
—
 
 
307
 
 
—
 
 
3,627
 


notes payable to affiliates
 
 
435
 
 
—
 
 
985
 
 
(981
)
 
439
 


deferred income taxes
 
 
8
 
 
(28
)
 
86
 
 
28
 
 
94
 


other noncurrent liabilities
 
 
160
 
 
138
 
 
555
 
 
(1
)
 
852
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total liabilities
 
 
6,173
 
 
1,314
 
 
4,498
 
 
(4,766
)
 
7,219
 


equity huntsman international llc members' equity:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


members' equity
 
 
3,049
 
 
4,764
 
 
2,217
 
 
(6,981
)
 
3,049
 


subsidiary preferred stock
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
1
 
 
(1
)
 
—
 


accumulated deficit
 
 
(1,667
)
 
(1,308
)
 
(549
)
 
1,857
 
 
(1,667
)


accumulated other comprehensive (loss) income
 
 
(354
)
 
1,600
 
 
(318
)
 
(1,282
)
 
(354
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total huntsman international llc members' equity
 
 
1,028
 
 
5,056
 
 
1,351
 
 
(6,407
)
 
1,028
 


noncontrolling interests in subsidiaries
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
19
 
 
41
 
 
60
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total equity
 
 
1,028
 
 
5,056
 
 
1,370
 
 
(6,366
)
 
1,088
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total liabilities and equity
 
$
7,201
 
$
6,370
 
$
5,868
 
$
(11,132
)
$
8,307
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
f-106






 









































table of contents 


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries  

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries  

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)  

28. condensed consolidating financial information—huntsman international (continued)  

 
huntsman international llc and subsidiaries  condensed consolidating statements of operations  year ended december 31, 2011  (dollars in millions)        
 



























 
 
parent company 
 
guarantors 
 
nonguarantors 
 
eliminations 
 
consolidated huntsman international
llc 
 


revenues:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


trade sales, services and fees, net
 
$
885
 
$
3,349
 
$
6,807
 
$
—
 
$
11,041
 


related party sales
 
 
453
 
 
493
 
 
1,098
 
 
(1,864
)
 
180
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total revenues
 
 
1,338
 
 
3,842
 
 
7,905
 
 
(1,864
)
 
11,221
 


cost of goods sold
 
 
1,178
 
 
3,160
 
 
6,855
 
 
(1,830
)
 
9,363
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


gross profit
 
 
160
 
 
682
 
 
1,050
 
 
(34
)
 
1,858
 


selling, general and administrative
 
 
182
 
 
97
 
 
637
 
 
—
 
 
916
 


research and development
 
 
50
 
 
34
 
 
82
 
 
—
 
 
166
 


other operating expense (income)
 
 
35
 
 
(18
)
 
(37
)
 
—
 
 
(20
)


restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs
 
 
1
 
 
—
 
 
166
 
 
—
 
 
167
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


operating (loss) income
 
 
(108
)
 
569
 
 
202
 
 
(34
)
 
629
 


interest (expense) income, net
 
 
(216
)
 
43
 
 
(89
)
 
—
 
 
(262
)


equity in income of investment in affiliates and subsidiaries
 
 
381
 
 
77
 
 
9
 
 
(459
)
 
8
 


loss on early extinguishment of debt
 
 
(7
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(7
)


other (expense) income
 
 
(35
)
 
—
 
 
1
 
 
36
 
 
2
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


income from continuing operations before income taxes
 
 
15
 
 
689
 
 
123
 
 
(457
)
 
370
 


income tax benefit (expense)
 
 
232
 
 
(210
)
 
(35
)
 
(100
)
 
(113
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


income from continuing operations
 
 
247
 
 
479
 
 
88
 
 
(557
)
 
257
 


income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax
 
 
6
 
 
(1
)
 
(6
)
 
—
 
 
(1
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


income before extraordinary gain
 
 
253
 
 
478
 
 
82
 
 
(557
)
 
256
 


extraordinary gain on the acquisition of a business, net of tax of nil
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
4
 
 
—
 
 
4
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net income
 
 
253
 
 
478
 
 
86
 
 
(557
)
 
260
 


net income attributable to noncontrolling interests
 
 
—
 
 
(2
)
 
(6
)
 
1
 
 
(7
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net income attributable to huntsman international llc
 
$
253
 
$
476
 
$
80
 
$
(556
)
$
253
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
f-107




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

28. condensed consolidating financial information—huntsman international (continued) 

 
 
huntsman international llc and subsidiaries  condensed consolidating statements of operations  year ended december 31, 2010  (dollars in millions)        
 



























 
 
parent
company 
 
guarantors 
 
nonguarantors 
 
eliminations 
 
consolidated
huntsman
international
llc 
 


revenues:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


trade sales, services and fees, net
 
$
790
 
$
2,514
 
$
5,745
 
$
—
 
$
9,049
 


related party sales
 
 
262
 
 
513
 
 
958
 
 
(1,532
)
 
201
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total revenues
 
 
1,052
 
 
3,027
 
 
6,703
 
 
(1,532
)
 
9,250
 


cost of goods sold
 
 
869
 
 
2,594
 
 
5,815
 
 
(1,506
)
 
7,772
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


gross profit
 
 
183
 
 
433
 
 
888
 
 
(26
)
 
1,478
 


operating expenses:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


selling, general and administrative
 
 
185
 
 
88
 
 
582
 
 
—
 
 
855
 


research and development
 
 
52
 
 
30
 
 
69
 
 
—
 
 
151
 


other operating (income) expense
 
 
(34
)
 
11
 
 
23
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs
 
 
1
 
 
3
 
 
25
 
 
—
 
 
29
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


operating income
 
 
(21
)
 
301
 
 
189
 
 
(26
)
 
443
 


interest (expense) income, net
 
 
(215
)
 
38
 
 
(71
)
 
—
 
 
(248
)


equity in (loss) income of investment in affiliates and subsidiaries
 
 
(1,199
)
 
91
 
 
24
 
 
1,108
 
 
24
 


loss on early extinguishment of debt
 
 
(37
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(37
)


dividends income
 
 
1,569
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(1,569
)
 
—
 


other (expense) income
 
 
(25
)
 
—
 
 
2
 
 
25
 
 
2
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


income from continuing operations before income taxes
 
 
72
 
 
430
 
 
144
 
 
(462
)
 
184
 


income tax benefit (expense)
 
 
101
 
 
(127
)
 
(14
)
 
—
 
 
(40
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


income from continuing operations
 
 
173
 
 
303
 
 
130
 
 
(462
)
 
144
 


income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax
 
 
7
 
 
68
 
 
(33
)
 
—
 
 
42
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


income before extraordinary loss
 
 
180
 
 
371
 
 
97
 
 
(462
)
 
186
 


extraordinary loss on the acquisition of a business, net of tax of nil
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(1
)
 
—
 
 
(1
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net income
 
 
180
 
 
371
 
 
96
 
 
(462
)
 
185
 


net income attributable to noncontrolling interests
 
 
—
 
 
(2
)
 
(4
)
 
1
 
 
(5
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net income attributable to huntsman international llc
 
$
180
 
$
369
 
$
92
 
$
(461
)
$
180
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
f-108




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

28. condensed consolidating financial information—huntsman international (continued) 

 
 
huntsman international llc and subsidiaries  condensed consolidating statements of operations  year ended december 31, 2009  (dollars in millions)        
 



























 
 
parent company 
 
guarantors 
 
nonguarantors 
 
eliminations 
 
consolidated
huntsman
international
llc 
 


revenues:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


trade sales, services and fees
 
$
654
 
$
2,106
 
$
4,809
 
$
—
 
$
7,569
 


related party sales
 
 
178
 
 
373
 
 
644
 
 
(1,099
)
 
96
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


total revenues
 
 
832
 
 
2,479
 
 
5,453
 
 
(1,099
)
 
7,665
 


cost of goods sold
 
 
676
 
 
1,983
 
 
4,977
 
 
(1,066
)
 
6,570
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


gross profit
 
 
156
 
 
496
 
 
476
 
 
(33
)
 
1,095
 


operating expenses:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


selling, general and administrative
 
 
154
 
 
123
 
 
562
 
 
—
 
 
839
 


research and development
 
 
51
 
 
30
 
 
64
 
 
—
 
 
145
 


other operating (income) expense
 
 
(24
)
 
(31
)
 
37
 
 
—
 
 
(18
)


restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs
 
 
9
 
 
2
 
 
77
 
 
—
 
 
88
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


operating (loss) income
 
 
(34
)
 
372
 
 
(264
)
 
(33
)
 
41
 


interest (expense) income, net
 
 
(214
)
 
40
 
 
(66
)
 
—
 
 
(240
)


loss on accounts receivable securitization program
 
 
(15
)
 
(2
)
 
(6
)
 
—
 
 
(23
)


equity in (loss) income of investment in affiliates and subsidiaries
 
 
(317
)
 
(514
)
 
6
 
 
828
 
 
3
 


loss on early extinguishment of debt
 
 
(21
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(21
)


other expense
 
 
(33
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
33
 
 
—
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


loss from continuing operations before income taxes
 
 
(634
)
 
(104
)
 
(330
)
 
828
 
 
(240
)


income tax benefit (expense)
 
 
224
 
 
(148
)
 
(179
)
 
(56
)
 
(159
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


loss from continuing operations
 
 
(410
)
 
(252
)
 
(509
)
 
772
 
 
(399
)


loss from discontinued operations, net of tax
 
 
—
 
 
(11
)
 
(8
)
 
—
 
 
(19
)


loss before extraordinary gain
 
 
(410
)
 
(263
)
 
(517
)
 
772
 
 
(418
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


extraordinary gain on the acquisition of a business, net of tax of nil
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
6
 
 
—
 
 
6
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net loss
 
 
(410
)
 
(263
)
 
(511
)
 
772
 
 
(412
)


net loss attributable to noncontrolling interests
 
 
—
 
 
1
 
 
2
 
 
(1
)
 
2
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net loss attributable to huntsman international llc
 
$
(410
)
$
(262
)
$
(509
)
$
771
 
$
(410
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
f-109






 









































table of contents 


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries  

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries  

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)  

28. condensed consolidating financial information—huntsman international (continued)  

 
huntsman international llc and subsidiaries  condensed consolidating statements of cash flows  year ended december 31, 2011  (dollars in millions)        
 



























 
 
parent
company 
 
guarantors 
 
nonguarantors 
 
eliminations 
 
consolidated
huntsman
international
llc 
 


net cash provided by operating activities
 
$
304
 
$
99
 
$
34
 
$
(5
)
$
432
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


investing activities:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


capital expenditures
 
 
(21
)
 
(70
)
 
(239
)
 
—
 
 
(330
)


proceeds from settlements treated as reimbursement of capital expenditures
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
3
 
 
—
 
 
3
 


acquisition of businesses, net of cash acquired and post-closing adjustments
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(34
)
 
—
 
 
(34
)


cash assumed in connection with the initial consolidation of a variable interest entity
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
28
 
 
—
 
 
28
 


proceeds from sale of businesses/assets
 
 
—
 
 
8
 
 
40
 
 
—
 
 
48
 


increase in receivable from affiliate
 
 
(57
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(57
)


investment in affiliate
 
 
(56
)
 
(16
)
 
—
 
 
72
 
 
—
 


investment in unconsolidated affiliate
 
 
—
 
 
(26
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(26
)


cash received from unconsolidated affiliates
 
 
—
 
 
30
 
 
2
 
 
—
 
 
32
 


other, net
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(4
)
 
3
 
 
(1
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net cash used in investing activities
 
 
(134
)
 
(74
)
 
(204
)
 
75
 
 
(337
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


financing activities:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net repayments under revolving loan facilities
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(2
)
 
—
 
 
(2
)


net borrowings on overdraft facilities
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
9
 
 
—
 
 
9
 


repayments of short-term debt
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(187
)
 
—
 
 
(187
)


borrowings on short-term debt
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
162
 
 
—
 
 
162
 


repayments of long-term debt
 
 
(305
)
 
—
 
 
(103
)
 
—
 
 
(408
)


proceeds from issuance of long-term debt
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
98
 
 
—
 
 
98
 


repayments of notes payable to affiliate
 
 
(105
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(105
)


proceeds from notes payable to affiliate
 
 
105
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
105
 


repayments of notes payable
 
 
(32
)
 
—
 
 
(2
)
 
—
 
 
(34
)


borrowings on notes payable
 
 
33
 
 
—
 
 
2
 
 
—
 
 
35
 


debt issuance costs paid
 
 
(7
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(7
)


call premiums related to early extinguishment of debt
 
 
(6
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(6
)


contribution from parent
 
 
—
 
 
(32
)
 
104
 
 
(72
)
 
—
 


dividends paid to parent
 
 
(79
)
 
(2
)
 
—
 
 
2
 
 
(79
)


dividends paid to noncontrolling interests
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(9
)
 
—
 
 
(9
)


excess tax benefit related to stock-based compensation
 
 
10
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
10
 


other, net
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net cash (used in) provided by financing activities
 
 
(386
)
 
(34
)
 
72
 
 
(70
)
 
(418
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


effect of exchange rate changes on cash
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(7
)
 
—
 
 
(7
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


decrease in cash and cash equivalents
 
 
(216
)
 
(9
)
 
(105
)
 
—
 
 
(330
)


cash and cash equivalents at beginning of period
 
 
220
 
 
9
 
 
332
 
 
—
 
 
561
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


cash and cash equivalents at end of period
 
$
4
 
$
—
 
$
227
 
$
—
 
$
231
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
f-110




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

28. condensed consolidating financial information—huntsman international (continued) 

 
huntsman international llc and subsidiaries  condensed consolidating statements of cash flows  year ended december 31, 2010  (dollars in millions)        
 



























 
 
parent
company 
 
guarantors 
 
nonguarantors 
 
eliminations 
 
consolidated
huntsman
international llc 
 


net cash (used in) provided by operating activities
 
$
(241
)
$
15
 
$
182
 
$
(2
)
$
(46
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


investing activities:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


capital expenditures
 
 
(26
)
 
(51
)
 
(159
)
 
—
 
 
(236
)


proceeds from settlements treated as reimbursement of capital expenditures
 
 
—
 
 
34
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
34
 


cash assumed in connection with the initial consolidation of a variable interest entity
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
14
 
 
—
 
 
14
 


proceeds from sale of businesses/assets
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
2
 
 
—
 
 
2
 


increase in receivable from affiliate
 
 
(57
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(57
)


investment in affiliate
 
 
(65
)
 
(13
)
 
—
 
 
78
 
 
—
 


investment in unconsolidated affiliates
 
 
—
 
 
(24
)
 
(3
)
 
—
 
 
(27
)


cash received from unconsolidated affiliates
 
 
—
 
 
26
 
 
5
 
 
—
 
 
31
 


other, net
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
1
 
 
—
 
 
1
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net cash used in investing activities
 
 
(148
)
 
(28
)
 
(140
)
 
78
 
 
(238
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


financing activities:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net repayments under revolving loan facilities
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(6
)
 
—
 
 
(6
)


revolving loan facility from a/r programs
 
 
254
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
254
 


net borrowings on overdraft facilities
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(2
)
 
—
 
 
(2
)


repayments of short-term debt
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(175
)
 
—
 
 
(175
)


borrowings on short-term debt
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
212
 
 
—
 
 
212
 


repayments of long-term debt
 
 
(1,154
)
 
—
 
 
(53
)
 
—
 
 
(1,207
)


proceeds from issuance of long-term debt
 
 
894
 
 
—
 
 
29
 
 
—
 
 
923
 


repayments of note payable to affiliate
 
 
(125
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(125
)


proceeds from notes payable to affiliate
 
 
110
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
110
 


intercompany repayments
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(5
)
 
5
 
 
—
 


repayments of notes payable
 
 
(38
)
 
—
 
 
(15
)
 
—
 
 
(53
)


borrowings on notes payable
 
 
33
 
 
—
 
 
13
 
 
—
 
 
46
 


debt issuance costs paid
 
 
(29
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(29
)


call premiums paid related to early extinguishment of debt
 
 
(28
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(28
)


contribution from parent
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
83
 
 
(83
)
 
—
 


dividends paid to parent
 
 
—
 
 
(2
)
 
—
 
 
2
 
 
—
 


excess tax benefit related to stock-based compensation
 
 
4
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
4
 


other, net
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(2
)
 
—
 
 
(2
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net cash (used in) provided by financing activities
 
 
(79
)
 
(2
)
 
79
 
 
(76
)
 
(78
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


effect of exchange rate changes on cash
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
4
 
 
—
 
 
4
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


(decrease) increase in cash and cash equivalents
 
 
(468
)
 
(15
)
 
125
 
 
—
 
 
(358
)


cash and cash equivalents at beginning of period
 
 
688
 
 
24
 
 
207
 
 
—
 
 
919
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


cash and cash equivalents at end of period
 
$
220
 
$
9
 
$
332
 
$
—
 
$
561
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
f-111




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 

28. condensed consolidating financial information—huntsman international (continued) 

 
huntsman international llc and subsidiaries  condensed consolidating statements of cash flows  year ended december 31, 2009  (dollars in millions)        
 



























 
 
parent
company 
 
guarantors 
 
nonguarantors 
 
eliminations 
 
consolidated
huntsman
international llc 
 


net cash provided by operating activities
 
$
288
 
$
48
 
$
84
 
$
—
 
$
420
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


investing activities:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


capital expenditures
 
 
(7
)
 
(70
)
 
(112
)
 
—
 
 
(189
)


acquisition of business, net of cash acquired and post-closing adjustments
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(31
)
 
—
 
 
(31
)


proceeds from sale of business/assets
 
 
—
 
 
2
 
 
3
 
 
—
 
 
5
 


increase in receivable from affiliate
 
 
(7
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(7
)


investment in affiliate
 
 
(258
)
 
(69
)
 
18
 
 
309
 
 
—
 


investment in unconsolidated affiliate
 
 
 
 
 
(15
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(15
)


cash received from unconsolidated affiliate
 
 
—
 
 
22
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
22
 


other, net
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
3
 
 
—
 
 
3
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net cash used in investing activities
 
 
(272
)
 
(130
)
 
(119
)
 
309
 
 
(212
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


financing activities:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net repayments under revolving loan facilities
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(14
)
 
—
 
 
(14
)


net repayments of overdraft facilities
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(12
)
 
—
 
 
(12
)


net repayments of short-term debt
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(13
)
 
—
 
 
(13
)


repayments of long-term debt
 
 
(510
)
 
—
 
 
(32
)
 
—
 
 
(542
)


proceeds from long-term debt
 
 
864
 
 
—
 
 
16
 
 
—
 
 
880
 


repayments of notes payable to affiliate
 
 
(403
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(403
)


proceeds from notes payable to affiliate
 
 
529
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
529
 


intercompany repayments
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(50
)
 
50
 
 
—
 


repayments of notes payable
 
 
(43
)
 
—
 
 
(20
)
 
—
 
 
(63
)


borrowings on notes payable
 
 
42
 
 
—
 
 
22
 
 
—
 
 
64
 


debt issuance costs paid
 
 
(5
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(5
)


call premiums related to early extinguishment of debt
 
 
(14
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(14
)


contribution from parent
 
 
236
 
 
103
 
 
256
 
 
(359
)
 
236
 


dividends paid to parent
 
 
(23
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(23
)


other, net
 
 
(1
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(1
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net cash provided by financing activities
 
 
672
 
 
103
 
 
153
 
 
(309
)
 
619
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


effect of exchange rate changes on cash
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
5
 
 
—
 
 
5
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


increase in cash and cash equivalents
 
 
688
 
 
21
 
 
123
 
 
—
 
 
832
 


cash and cash equivalents at beginning of period
 
 
—
 
 
3
 
 
84
 
 
—
 
 
87
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


cash and cash equivalents at end of period
 
$
688
 
$
24
 
$
207
 
$
—
 
$
919
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
f-112






 




































 
table of contents 


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries  

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries  

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)  

29. selected unaudited quarterly financial data  



a summary of selected unaudited quarterly financial data for the years ended december 31, 2011 and 2010 is as follows (dollars in millions, except per share amounts): 

huntsman corporation  
 
























 
 
three months ended(1) 
 


 
 
march 31,
2011 
 
june 30,
2011 
 
september 30,
2011(2) 
 
december 31,
2011(3) 
 


revenues
 
$
2,679
 
$
2,934
 
$
2,976
 
$
2,632
 


gross profit
 
 
460
 
 
501
 
 
490
 
 
389
 


restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs (credits)
 
 
7
 
 
9
 
 
155
 
 
(4
)


income (loss) from continuing operations
 
 
80
 
 
124
 
 
(42
)
 
89
 


income (loss) before extraordinary gain
 
 
66
 
 
123
 
 
(32
)
 
93
 


net income (loss)
 
 
67
 
 
124
 
 
(32
)
 
95
 


net income (loss) attributable to huntsman corporation
 
 
62
 
 
114
 
 
(34
)
 
105
 


basic income (loss) per share:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


income (loss) from continuing operations attributable to huntsman corporation common stockholders
 
 
0.32
 
 
0.48
 
 
(0.19
)
 
0.42
 


net income (loss) attributable to huntsman corporation common stockholders
 
 
0.26
 
 
0.48
 
 
(0.14
)
 
0.45
 


diluted income (loss) per share:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


income (loss) from continuing operations attributable to huntsman corporation common stockholders
 
 
0.31
 
 
0.47
 
 
(0.19
)
 
0.41
 


net income (loss) attributable to huntsman corporation common stockholders
 
 
0.26
 
 
0.47
 
 
(0.14
)
 
0.44
 



 
f-113




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 


29. selected unaudited quarterly financial data (continued) 


 
























 
 
three months ended(1) 
 


 
 
march 31,
2010(4) 
 
june 30,
2010(5) 
 
september 30,
2010 
 
december 31,
2010 
 


revenues
 
$
2,094
 
$
2,343
 
$
2,401
 
$
2,412
 


gross profit
 
 
281
 
 
385
 
 
415
 
 
380
 


restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs
 
 
3
 
 
17
 
 
4
 
 
5
 


(loss) income from continuing operations
 
 
(159
)
 
54
 
 
57
 
 
39
 


(loss) income before extraordinary gain
 
 
(172
)
 
116
 
 
56
 
 
33
 


net (loss) income
 
 
(172
)
 
116
 
 
56
 
 
32
 


net (loss) income attributable to huntsman corporation
 
 
(172
)
 
114
 
 
55
 
 
30
 


basic (loss) income per share:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


(loss) income from continuing operations attributable to huntsman corporation common stockholders
 
 
(0.68
)
 
0.22
 
 
0.24
 
 
0.16
 


net (loss) income attributable to huntsman corporation common stockholders
 
 
(0.73
)
 
0.48
 
 
0.23
 
 
0.13
 


diluted (loss) income per share:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


(loss) income from continuing operations attributable to huntsman corporation common stockholders
 
 
(0.68
)
 
0.21
 
 
0.23
 
 
0.15
 


net (loss) income attributable to huntsman corporation common stockholders
 
 
(0.73
)
 
0.47
 
 
0.23
 
 
0.12
 



 
huntsman international  
 
























 
 
three months ended 
 


 
 
march 31,
2011 
 
june 30,
2011 
 
september 30,
2011(2) 
 
december 31,
2011(3) 
 


revenues
 
$
2,679
 
$
2,934
 
$
2,976
 
$
2,632
 


gross profit
 
 
465
 
 
505
 
 
495
 
 
393
 


restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs
 
 
7
 
 
9
 
 
155
 
 
(4
)


income (loss) from continuing operations
 
 
81
 
 
127
 
 
(39
)
 
88
 


income (loss) before extraordinary gain
 
 
67
 
 
126
 
 
(29
)
 
92
 


net income (loss)
 
 
68
 
 
127
 
 
(29
)
 
94
 


net income (loss) attributable to huntsman international llc
 
$
63
 
$
117
 
$
(31
)
$
104
 



 
f-114




 

table of contents


huntsman corporation and subsidiaries 

huntsman international llc and subsidiaries 

notes to consolidated financial statements (continued) 


29. selected unaudited quarterly financial data (continued) 


 
























 
 
three months ended 
 


 
 
march 31,
2010 
 
june 30,
2010(5) 
 
september 30,
2010 
 
december 31,
2010 
 


revenues
 
$
2,094
 
$
2,343
 
$
2,401
 
$
2,412
 


gross profit
 
 
286
 
 
388
 
 
420
 
 
384
 


restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs
 
 
3
 
 
17
 
 
4
 
 
5
 


(loss) income from continuing operations
 
 
(13
)
 
57
 
 
60
 
 
40
 


(loss) income before extraordinary gain
 
 
(26
)
 
119
 
 
59
 
 
34
 


net (loss) income
 
 
(26
)
 
119
 
 
59
 
 
33
 


net (loss) income attributable to huntsman international llc
 
 
(26
)
 
117
 
 
58
 
 
31
 







 

 
(1)basic
and diluted income per share are computed independently for each of the quarters presented based on the weighted average number of common shares
outstanding during that period. therefore, the sum of quarterly basic and diluted per share information may not equal annual basic and diluted earnings per share.
(2)during
the quarter ended september 30, 2011, we announced plans to implement a significant restructuring of our textile effects business, including
the closure of our production facilities and business support offices in basel, switzerland. in connection with this plan during 2011, we recorded a charge of $62 million for workforce
reduction and a noncash $53 million charge for the impairment of long-lived assets at our basel, switzerland manufacturing facility.
(3)during
the quarter ended december 31, 2011, our advanced materials division completed the sale of its stereolithography resin and
digitalis® machine manufacturing businesses to 3d systems corporation and recognized a pre-tax gain of $34 million.
(4)during
the quarter ended march 31, 2010, we repurchased the entire $250 million principal amount of our outstanding convertible notes for
approximately $382 million and recorded a loss on early extinguishment of debt of $146 million.
(5)during
the quarter ended june 30, 2010, we recorded a non-recurring $15 million credit to equity income of investment in
unconsolidated affiliates to appropriately reflect our investment in the sasol-huntsman joint venture. additionally, during the quarter ended june 30, 2010, we recorded a reduction to interest
expense of $15 million relating to the ineffective portion of our cross-currency interest rate contracts. 
 
f-115






 









































table of contents 


 

huntsman corporation (parent only)
schedule i—condensed financial information of registrant
huntsman corporation (parent only)
balance sheets
(dollars in millions)  
 


















 
 
december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 


assets
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


cash and cash equivalents
 
$
323
 
$
405
 


receivable from affiliate
 
 
14
 
 
14
 


note receivable from affiliate
 
 
100
 
 
100
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total current assets
 
 
437
 
 
519
 


note receivable from affiliate-long-term
 
 
435
 
 
435
 


investment in and advances to affiliates
 
 
944
 
 
938
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total assets
 
$
1,816
 
$
1,892
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


liabilities and stockholders' equity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


accounts payable
 
$
—
 
$
1
 


payable to affiliate
 
 
143
 
 
86
 


accrued liabilities
 
 
2
 
 
2
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total current liabilities
 
 
145
 
 
89
 


other long term liabilities
 
 
9
 
 
13
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total liabilities
 
 
154
 
 
102
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


stockholders' equity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


common stock, $0.01 par value, 1,200,000,000 shares authorized, 241,836,001 and 239,549,365 issued and 235,746,087 and 236,799,455 outstanding as of
december 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively
 
 
2
 
 
2
 


additional paid-in capital
 
 
3,228
 
 
3,186
 


treasury stock, 4,043,526 shares at december 31, 2011
 
 
(50
)
 
—
 


unearned stock-based compensation
 
 
(12
)
 
(11
)


accumulated deficit
 
 
(947
)
 
(1,090
)


accumulated other comprehensive loss
 
 
(559
)
 
(297
)


 
 
 
 
 
 


total stockholders' equity
 
 
1,662
 
 
1,790
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


total liabilities and stockholders' equity
 
$
1,816
 
$
1,892
 


 
 
 
 
 
 



 

   

   
  
this statement should be read in conjunction with the notes to the consolidated financial statements. 

f-116




 

table of contents

 
 
huntsman corporation (parent only)  statements of operations and comprehensive (loss) income  (dollars in millions)        
 





















 
 
year ended december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


selling, general and administrative
 
$
(15
)
$
(15
)
$
(2
)


interest income (expense), net
 
 
13
 
 
19
 
 
(2
)


equity in income (loss) of subsidiaries
 
 
170
 
 
165
 
 
(431
)


dividend income—affiliate
 
 
79
 
 
—
 
 
23
 


(expense) income associated with the merger
 
 
—
 
 
(4
)
 
835
 


loss on early extinguishment of debt
 
 
—
 
 
(146
)
 
—
 


income tax benefit (expense)
 
 
—
 
 
8
 
 
(309
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net income
 
$
247
 
$
27
 
$
114
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net income
 
$
247
 
$
27
 
$
114
 


other comprehensive (loss) income from subsidiaries
 
 
(262
)
 
(10
)
 
202
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


comprehensive (loss) income
 
$
(15
)
$
17
 
$
316
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 

   

   
  
this statement should be read in conjunction with the notes to the consolidated financial statements. 

f-117






 




































 
table of contents 



huntsman corporation (parent only)  

statements of stockholders' equity  

(dollars in millions)
 




































 
 
huntsman corporation stockholders 
 
 
 


 
 
shares 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
accumulated
other
comprehensive
(loss) income 
 
 
 


 
 
common
stock 
 
common
stock 
 
additional
paid-in
capital 
 
treasury
stock 
 
unearned
stock-based
compensation 
 
accumulated
deficit 
 
total
equity 
 


balance, january 1, 2009
 
 
233,553,515
 
$
2
 
$
3,141
 
$
—
 
$
(13
)
$
(1,031
)
$
(489
)
$
1,610
 


net income
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
114
 
 
—
 
 
114
 


other comprehensive income
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
202
 
 
202
 


issuance of nonvested stock awards
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
8
 
 
—
 
 
(8
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


vesting of stock awards
 
 
742,565
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


recognition of stock-based compensation
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
6
 
 
—
 
 
10
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
16
 


repurchase and cancellation of stock awards
 
 
(214,590
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(2
)
 
—
 
 
(2
)


dividends declared on common stock
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(96
)
 
—
 
 
(96
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


balance, december 31, 2009
 
 
234,081,490
 
 
2
 
 
3,155
 
 
—
 
 
(11
)
 
(1,015
)
 
(287
)
 
1,844
 


net income
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
27
 
 
—
 
 
27
 


other comprehensive loss
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(10
)
 
(10
)


consolidation of a variable interest entity
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


issuance of nonvested stock awards
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
12
 
 
—
 
 
(12
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


vesting of stock awards
 
 
1,939,524
 
 
—
 
 
9
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
9
 


recognition of stock-based compensation
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
3
 
 
—
 
 
12
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
15
 


repurchase and cancellation of stock awards
 
 
(431,052
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(6
)
 
—
 
 
(6
)


stock options exercised
 
 
1,209,493
 
 
—
 
 
3
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
3
 


excess tax benefit related to stock-based compensation
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
4
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
4
 


dividends declared on common stock
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(96
)
 
—
 
 
(96
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


balance, december 31, 2010
 
 
236,799,455
 
 
2
 
 
3,186
 
 
—
 
 
(11
)
 
(1,090
)
 
(297
)
 
1,790
 


net income
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
247
 
 
—
 
 
247
 


dividend paid to noncontrolling interest
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


other comprehensive loss
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(262
)
 
(262
)


consolidation of a variable interest entity
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


issuance of nonvested stock awards
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
11
 
 
—
 
 
(11
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


vesting of stock awards
 
 
2,229,418
 
 
—
 
 
13
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
13
 


recognition of stock-based compensation
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
5
 
 
—
 
 
10
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
15
 


repurchase of common stock
 
 
(4,043,526
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(50
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(50
)


repurchase and cancellation of stock awards
 
 
(507,624
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(8
)
 
—
 
 
(8
)


stock options exercised
 
 
1,268,364
 
 
—
 
 
3
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
3
 


excess tax benefit related to stock-based compensation
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
10
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
10
 


dividends declared on common stock
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(96
)
 
—
 
 
(96
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


balance, december 31, 2011
 
 
235,746,087
 
$
2
 
$
3,228
 
$
(50
)
$
(12
)
$
(947
)
$
(559
)
$
1,662
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
this statement should be read in conjunction with the notes to the consolidated financial statements. 

f-118






 









































table of contents 

 
 
huntsman corporation (parent only)            statements of cash flows            (dollars in millions)        
 





















 
 
year ended december 31, 
 


 
 
2011 
 
2010 
 
2009 
 


operating activities:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net income
 
$
247
 
$
27
 
$
114
 


equity in (income) loss of subsidiaries
 
 
(170
)
 
(165
)
 
431
 


loss on early extinguishment of debt
 
 
—
 
 
146
 
 
—
 


stock-based compensation
 
 
1
 
 
3
 
 
4
 


noncash interest income
 
 
(13
)
 
(19
)
 
(17
)


changes in operating assets and liabilities
 
 
62
 
 
(4
)
 
175
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net cash provided by (used in) operating activities
 
 
127
 
 
(12
)
 
707
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


investing activities:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


loan to affiliate
 
 
(105
)
 
(110
)
 
(529
)


repayments of loan by affiliate
 
 
105
 
 
125
 
 
403
 


investment in affiliate
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(236
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net cash provided by (used in) investing activities
 
 
—
 
 
15
 
 
(362
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


financing activities:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


repayments of convertible note
 
 
—
 
 
(250
)
 
—
 


call premiums related to early extinguishment of debt
 
 
—
 
 
(132
)
 
—
 


dividends paid to common stockholders
 
 
(96
)
 
(96
)
 
(96
)


repurchase and cancellation of stock awards
 
 
(8
)
 
(6
)
 
(2
)


proceeds from issuance of common stock
 
 
3
 
 
3
 
 
—
 


repuchase of common stock
 
 
(50
)
 
—
 
 
—
 


increase in payable to affiliates
 
 
(57
)
 
57
 
 
7
 


other, net
 
 
(1
)
 
—
 
 
2
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


net cash used in financing activities
 
 
(209
)
 
(424
)
 
(89
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


(decrease) increase in cash and cash equivalents
 
 
(82
)
 
(421
)
 
256
 


cash and cash equivalents at beginning of period
 
 
405
 
 
826
 
 
570
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


cash and cash equivalents at end of period
 
$
323
 
$
405
 
$
826
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 

   

   
  
this statement should be read in conjunction with the notes to the consolidated financial statements. 

f-119






 




































 
table of contents 

 

huntsman corporation and subsidiaries
schedule ii—valuation and qualifying accounts
(dollars in millions)  
 



























column a




 
 
column b 
 
column c 
 
 
 
column d 
 
column e 
 


 
 
 
 
additions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


description



 
 
balance at
beginning
of period 
 
charges
(credits)
to cost and
expenses 
 
charged
to other
accounts 
 
deductions 
 
balance at
end of
period 
 


allowance for doubtful accounts:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


year ended december 31, 2011
 
$
52
 
$
(4
)
$
(2
)
$
—
 
$
46
 


year ended december 31, 2010
 
 
56
 
 
6
 
 
(10
)
 
—
 
 
52
 


year ended december 31, 2009
 
 
47
 
 
9
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
56
 



 
huntsman international llc and subsidiaries
schedule ii—valuation and qualifying accounts
(dollars in millions)  
 



























column a




 
 
column b 
 
column c 
 
 
 
column d 
 
column e 
 


 
 
 
 
additions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


description



 
 
balance at
beginning
of period 
 
charges
(credits)
to cost and
expenses 
 
charged
to other
accounts 
 
deductions 
 
balance at
end of
period 
 


allowance for doubtful accounts:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


year ended december 31, 2011
 
$
52
 
$
(4
)
$
(2
)
$
—
 
$
46
 


year ended december 31, 2010
 
 
56
 
 
6
 
 
(10
)
 
—
 
 
52
 


year ended december 31, 2009
 
 
47
 
 
9
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
56
 



 
f-120
















































table of contents 

 
 
exhibit index        
 














number 
 
description 


 
3.1
 
second amended and restated certificate of incorporation of the company (incorporated by reference to exhibit 3.1 to our registration statement on form s-1/a filed on february 9, 2005)


 
3.2
 
third amended and restated bylaws of huntsman corporation effective march 24, 2010 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 3.1(i) to our current report on form 8-k filed on march 26, 2010)



 
4.1
 
indenture, dated as of december 17, 2004, among huntsman international llc, as issuer, the guarantors named therein and wells fargo bank, national association, as trustee, relating to the
73/8% senior subordinated notes due 2015 and the 71/2% senior subordinated notes due 2015 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.1 to huntsman international llc's current report on
form 8-k filed on december 23, 2004 (file no. 333-85141))


 
4.2
 
form of restricted 73/8% senior subordinated note denominated in dollars due 2015 (included as exhibit a-1 to exhibit 4.1)


 
4.3
 
form of restricted 71/2% senior subordinated note denominated in euros due 2015 (included as exhibit a-2 to exhibit 4.1)


 
4.4
 
form of unrestricted 73/8% senior subordinated note denominated in dollars due 2015 (included as exhibit a-3 to exhibit 4.1)


 
4.5
 
form of unrestricted 71/2% senior subordinated note denominated in euros due 2015 (included as exhibit a-4 to exhibit 4.1)


 
4.6
 
form of guarantee (included as exhibit e to exhibit 4.1)


 
4.7
 
registration rights agreement dated as of february 10, 2005, by and among the company and the stockholders signatory thereto (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to our current report on form 8-k
filed on february 16, 2005 (file no. 001-32427))


 
4.8
 
form of stock certificate of huntsman corporation (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.68 to amendment no. 3 to our registration statement on form s-1 filed on february 8, 2005)


 
4.9
 
supplemental indenture dated august 16, 2005 to indenture dated as december 17, 2004 by and among huntsman international llc, the guarantors named therein, and wells fargo bank, national association (as
successor by consolidation to wells fargo bank minnesota, national association), as trustee, relating to huntsman international llc's dollar denominated 73/8% senior subordinated notes due 2015 and euro denominated
71/2% senior subordinated notes due 2015 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.4 to huntsman international llc's current report on form 8-k filed on august 22, 2005 (file no. 333-85141))



 
4.10
 
form of restricted stock agreement for outside directors, effective for grants prior to february 6, 2008 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.7 to our registration statement on form s-8 filed on
february 10, 2006)


 
4.11
 
form of restricted stock unit agreement for outside directors, effective for grants prior to february 6, 2008 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.8 of our registration statement on form s-8 filed on
february 10, 2006)


 
4.12
 
form of restricted stock agreement for outside directors (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.31 to our annual report on form 10-k filed on february 22, 2008)



 
 



table of contents
 














number 
 
description 


 
4.13
 
form of restricted stock unit agreement for outside directors, effective for grants from february 6, 2008 to september 21, 2010 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.32 to our annual report on
form 10-k filed on february 22, 2008)


 
4.14
 
indenture, dated as of july 6, 2009, by and among huntsman international llc, the subsidiary guarantors named therein and wilmington trust fsb, a federal savings bank, as trustee (incorporated by reference
to exhibit 4.1 to our current report on form 8-k filed on july 8, 2009)


 
4.15
 
form of 51/2% senior note due 2016 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.2 to our current report on form 8-k filed on july 8, 2009)


 
4.16
 
form of guarantee (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.3 to our current report on form 8-k filed on july 8, 2009)


 
4.17
 
amended and restated indenture, dated as of september 10, 2009, by and among huntsman international llc, the subsidiary guarantors named therein and wilmington trust fsb, a federal savings bank, as trustee
(incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.1 to our current report on form 8-k filed on september 14, 2009)


 
4.18
 
indenture, dated as of march 17, 2010, by and among huntsman international llc, the subsidiary guarantors therein and wells fargo bank, national association, as trustee (incorporated by reference to
exhibit 4.1 to our current report on form 8-k filed on march 19, 2010)


 
4.19
 
form of 85/8% senior subordinated note due 2020 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.2 to our current report on form 8-k filed on march 19, 2010)


 
4.20
 
form of guarantee (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.3 to our current report on form 8-k filed on march 19, 2010)


 
4.21
 
indenture, dated as of september 24, 2010, by and among huntsman international llc, the subsidiary guarantors named therein and wells fargo bank, national association, as trustee (incorporated by reference
to exhibit 4.1 to our current report on form 8-k filed on september 30, 2010)


 
4.22
 
form of 85/8% senior subordinated note due 2021 (included as exhibit a to exhibit 4.24) (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.2 to our current report on form 8-k filed
on september 30, 2010)


 
4.23
 
form of guarantee (included as exhibit e to exhibit 4.24) (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.3 to our current report on form 8-k filed on september 30, 2010)


 
10.1
 
employment agreement with anthony hankins (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.27 to amendment no. 2 to our registration statement on form s-1 filed on january 28, 2005)


 
10.2
 
huntsman corporation stock incentive plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.19 to amendment no. 4 to our registration statement on form s-1 filed on february 8, 2005)


 
10.3
 
form of nonqualified stock option agreement, effective for grants prior to february 21, 2011 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.20 to amendment no. 4 to our registration statement on form s-1
filed on february 8, 2005)


 
10.4
 
form of restricted stock agreement, effective for grants prior to february 6, 2008 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.21 to amendment no. 4 to our registration statement on form s-1 filed on
february 8, 2005)



 
 



table of contents
 














number 
 
description 


 
10.5
 
form of stock appreciation rights agreement (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.22 to amendment no. 4 to our registration statement on form s-1 filed on february 8, 2005)


 
10.6
 
form of phantom share agreement, effective for grants prior to february 6, 2008 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.23 to amendment no. 4 to our registration statement on form s-1 filed on
february 8, 2005)


 
10.7
 
form of executive severance plan (as amended and restated) (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.24 to amendment no. 4 to our registration statement on form s-1 filed on february 8,
2005)


 
10.8
 
form of indemnification agreement (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.25 to amendment no. 4 to our registration statement on form s-1 filed on february 8, 2005)


 
10.9
 
credit agreement dated august 16, 2005 among huntsman international llc, deutsche bank ag new york branch as administrative agent and the other financial institutions named therein (incorporated by reference
to exhibit 10.1 to huntsman international llc's current report on form 8-k filed august 22, 2005 (file no. 333-85141))


 
10.10
 
form of non-qualified stock option agreement for outside directors (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to our current report on form 8-k filed november 8, 2005 (file no. 001-32427))



 
10.11
 
consent and first amendment to credit agreement dated december 12, 2005 among the company, deutsche bank ag new york branch as administrative agent and the other financial institutions named therein (incorporated
by reference to exhibit 10.1 to huntsman international llc's current report on form 8-k filed december 27, 2005 (file no. 333-85141)


 
10.12
 
amended and restated huntsman supplemental executive retirement plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to our current report on form 8-k filed december 30, 2005 (file no. 001-32427))



 
10.13
 
huntsman supplemental executive mpp plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.2 to our current report on form 8-k filed december 30, 2005 (file no. 001-32427))


 
10.14
 
amended and restated huntsman supplemental savings plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.3 to our current report on form 8-k filed december 30, 2005 (file no. 001-32427))


 
10.15
 
huntsman outside directors elective deferral plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.4 to our current report on form 8-k filed december 30, 2005 (file no. 001-32427))


 
10.16
 
consent and second amendment to credit agreement and amendment to security documents, dated june 30, 2006, by and among huntsman international llc, as borrower, deutsche bank ag new york branch, as
administrative agent and collateral agent, and the other financial institutions party thereto (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to our current report on form 8-k filed on july 7, 2006 (file no. 001-32427))


 
10.17
 
third amendment to credit agreement dated april 19, 2007 by and among huntsman international llc, as borrower, deutsche bank ag new york branch, as administrative agent and collateral agent, and the other
financial institutions party thereto (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to our current report on form 8-k filed on april 23, 2007)



 
 



table of contents
 














number 
 
description 


 
10.18
 
first amendment to huntsman supplemental executive retirement plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.32 to our annual report on form 10-k filed on february 22, 2008)


 
10.19
 
first amendment to huntsman supplemental executive mpp plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.33 to our annual report on form 10-k filed on february 22, 2008)


 
10.20
 
first amendment to huntsman supplemental savings plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.34 to our annual report on form 10-k filed on february 22, 2008)


 
10.21
 
second amendment to huntsman supplemental savings plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.35 to our annual report on form 10-k filed on february 22, 2008)


 
10.22
 
first amendment to huntsman outside directors elective deferral plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.36 to our annual report on form 10-k filed on february 22, 2008)


 
10.23
 
form of restricted stock agreement effective for grants from february 6, 2008 to september 21, 2010 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.37 to our annual report on form 10-k filed on
february 22, 2008)


 
10.24
 
form of phantom share agreement effective for grants from february 6, 2008 to february 23, 2010 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.38 to our annual report on form 10-k filed on
february 22, 2008)


 
10.25
 
letter agreement, dated june 15, 2009, among huntsman polyurethanes (uk) ltd. and paul g. hulme (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to our current report on form 8-k filed on june 17,
2009)


 
10.26
 
fourth amendment to credit agreement, dated as of june 22, 2009, by and among huntsman international llc and credit suisse securities (usa) llc and deutsche bank securities inc. (incorporated by
reference to exhibit 10.3 to our current report on form 8-k filed on june 23, 2009)


 
10.27
 
form of registration rights agreement dated as of june 23, 2009, by and among huntsman international llc, the subsidiary guarantors party thereto and credit suisse securities (usa) llc and deutsche bank
securities inc. (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.4 to our current report on form 8-k filed on june 23, 2009)


 
10.28
 
voting agreement, dated as of june 22, 2009, by and among huntsman international llc, deutsche bank ag new york branch and credit suisse, cayman islands branch (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.5 to
our current report on form 8-k filed on june 23, 2009)


 
10.29
 
u.s. receivables loan agreement dated as of october 16, 2009 among huntsman receivables finance ii llc, huntsman (europe) bvba, the several entities party thereto as lenders, the several financial
institutions party thereto as funding agents, the several commercial paper conduits party thereto as conduit lenders, the several financial institutions party thereto as committed lenders, wachovia bank national association, as administrative agent,
and wachovia bank national association, as collateral agent (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to our current report on form 8-k filed on october 22, 2009)


 
10.30
 
u.s. contribution agreement dated as of october 16, 2009 between huntsman international llc and huntsman receivables finance ii llc (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.2 to our current report
on form 8-k filed on october 22, 2009)



 
 



table of contents
 














number 
 
description 


 
10.31
 
european receivables loan agreement dated as of october 16, 2009 between huntsman receivables finance llc, huntsman (europe) bvba, the several entities party thereto as lenders, the several financial
institutions party thereto as funding agents, barclays bank plc, as administrative agent, and barclays bank plc, as collateral agent (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.3 to our current report on form 8-k filed on
october 22, 2009)


 
10.32
 
european contribution agreement dated as of october 16, 2009 between huntsman international llc and huntsman receivables finance llc (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.4 to our current report
on form 8-k filed on october 22, 2009)


 
10.33
 
fifth amendment to credit agreement, dated as of march 9, 2010, by and among huntsman international llc, jpmorgan chase bank, n.a. and the other financial institutions party thereto (incorporated by
reference to exhibit 10.1 to our current report on form 10-q filed on may 7, 2010)


 
10.34
 
registration rights agreement, dated as of march 17, 2010, by and among huntsman international llc, the subsidiary guarantors named therein and goldman, sachs & co., j.p. morgan
securities inc., barclays capital inc., banc of america securities llc, citigroup global markets inc. and credit suisse securities (usa) llc (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to our current report on
form 8-k filed on march 19, 2010)


 
10.35
 
registration rights agreement, dated as of september 24, 2010, by and among huntsman international llc, the subsidiary guarantors named therein and goldman, sachs & co., j.p. morgan
securities llc, barclays capital inc., banc of america securities llc, citigroup global markets inc., credit suisse securities (usa) llc and hsbc securities (usa) inc. (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1
to our current report on form 8-k filed on september 30, 2010)


 
10.36
 
certain exhibits and schedules to exhibit a to the fifth amendment to credit agreement, dated as of march 9, 2010, which was previously filed as exhibit 10.1 to our quarterly report on form 10-q
filed may 7, 2010 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.2 to our current report on form 10-q filed on november 4, 2010)


 
10.37
 
registration rights agreement, dated as of november 12, 2010, by and among huntsman international llc, the subsidiary guarantors named therein and citigroup global markets inc. (incorporated by
reference to exhibit 10.1 to our current report on form 8-k filed on november 15, 2010)


 
10.38
 
second amendment to huntsman supplemental executive retirement plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.38 to our annual report on form 10-k filed on february 17, 2011)


 
10.39
 
third amendment to huntsman supplemental executive retirement plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.39 to our annual report on form 10-k filed on february 17, 2011)


 
10.40
 
form of restricted stock agreement (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.40 to our annual report on form 10-k filed on february 17, 2011)


 
10.41
 
form of phantom share agreement (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.41 to our annual report on form 10-k filed on february 17, 2011)


 
10.42
 
form of nonqualified stock option agreement (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.42 to our annual report on form 10-k filed on february 17, 2011)


 
10.43
 
form of restricted stock unit agreement for outside directors (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.43 to our annual report on form 10-k filed on february 17, 2011)



 
 



table of contents
 














number 
 
description 


 
10.44
 
sixth amendment, dated as of march 7, 2011, to the credit agreement, dated as of august 16, 2005, among huntsman international llc, the lenders from time to time party thereto, and jpmorgan chase bank, n.a.,
as administrative agent (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to our current report on form 8-k filed on march 9, 2011)


 
10.45
 
master amendment no. 2 to the u.s. receivables loan agreement, u.s. servicing agreement and transaction documents dated as of april 18, 2011 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to our current
report on form 8-k filed on april 20, 2011)


 
10.46
 
master amendment no. 2 to the european receivables loan agreement, european servicing agreement and transaction documents dated as of april 15, 2011 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.2 to our
current report on form 8-k filed on april 20, 2011)


 
10.47
 
huntsman executive severance plan (as amended and restated) (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.4 to our current report on form 10-q filed on may 5, 2011)


 
10.48
 
second amendment to huntsman outside directors elective deferral plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.5 to our current report on form 10-q filed on may 5, 2011)


 
10.49
 
third amendment to huntsman outside directors elective deferral plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.6 to our current report on form 10-q filed on may 5, 2011)


 
10.50
 
huntsman corporation stock incentive plan (amended and restated) (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.1 to our registration statement on form s-8 filed on may 10, 2011)


 
  
 
 


 
21.1
*
subsidiaries of the company


 
  
 
 


 
23.1
*
consent of independent registered public accounting firm


 
  
 
 


 
31.1
*
certification of chief executive officer pursuant to section 302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002


 
  
 
 


 
31.2
*
certification of chief financial officer pursuant to section 302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002


 
  
 
 


 
32.1
*
certification of chief executive officer pursuant to section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002


 
  
 
 


 
32.2
*
certification of chief financial officer pursuant to section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002


 
  
 
 


 
101.ins
*†
xbrl instance document


 
  
 
 


 
101.sch
*†
xbrl taxonomy extension schema


 
  
 
 


 
101.cal
*†
xbrl taxonomy extension calculation linkbase


 
  
 
 


 
101.lab
*†
xbrl taxonomy extension label linkbase


 
  
 
 


 
101.pre
*†
xbrl taxonomy extension presentation linkbase


 
  
 
 


 
101.def
*†
xbrl taxonomy extension definition linkbase







 

 
*filed
herewith.
†pursuant
to rule 406t of regulation s-t, the interactive data files on exhibit 101 hereto are deemed not filed or
part of a registration statement or prospectus for purposes of sections 11 or 12 of the securities act of 1933, as amended, are deemed not filed for purposes of section 18 of the
securities and exchange act of 1934, as amended, and otherwise are not subject to liability under those sections.